Common discomforts during pregnancy
Vanliga besvär under en graviditet - engelska

When you are pregnant, your body is affected in different ways. This may give rise to different discomforts, which will usually disappear after you give birth.

This text covers some of the most common discomforts.

Läs texten på svenska här.
Nausea is common

Many people have what is called morning sickness, which means they feel nauseous during pregnancy. Some vomit.
You may be very tired

Fatigue is common during pregnancy.

This fatigue may be due to anaemia, which is when you do not have enough healthy red blood cells. Your midwife will therefore check your blood count when you visit the midwifery clinic. You may need to take iron tablets if your blood count is too low.
You may have stomach pain

Your stomach may hurt for various reasons. The uterus is growing and the baby is moving. You may also be having Braxton Hicks contractions.
You may have pelvic and back pain

The ligaments in your body relax and stretch during pregnancy, which can put a strain on your joints. You may feel pain in your pelvic area and in your lower back.
You may catch a cold more easily

During pregnancy, your immune system becomes weaker. This may make it easier for you to catch a cold.
Your breasts may feel tender

Breasts grow early in pregnancy as they prepare to produce milk.

This may make your breasts feel sore and taut throughout your pregnancy.
Vaginal discharge

It is common to have more discharge when you are pregnant. Discharge is a fluid that comes out of your vagina.
You may have trouble sleeping

It is common to have trouble sleeping during pregnancy. For example, it may be hard to find a comfortable position in bed. Some people need to get up frequently to pee.
Leg cramps

Some people may wake up with cramps in their legs. This can cause a lot of pain for a short time. It is not a serious problem.

Standing up may help. You can also try massaging the muscle.
You may get a stuffy nose and nosebleeds

You have more fluid in your body during pregnancy. This makes your mucous membranes swollen, and may make it easier to bleed.

For example, you may get a nosebleed. A stuffy nose is also a common discomfort.
Sleep with your head elevated

Try sleeping with your head elevated if you have a stuffy nose.

You can also try using saline in your nose. This is available at any pharmacy.

Avoid using non-prescription nose drops for more than ten days.
Your legs and feet may become swollen

Legs and feet often become swollen during late pregnancy. Compression socks may help ease this.

Also try to keep your legs elevated.
Changes to your skin

Some people develop stretch marks, which look like little lines in the skin. They do not go away, but they may fade after pregnancy.
You may feel sad

Pregnancy may affect your mood. Some people get sad more easily than usual or feel sad all the time.

Talk to a midwife about how you are feeling.
You may feel dizzy

In early pregnancy, your blood pressure may drop. You may then feel dizzy.

Later in your pregnancy, your blood pressure will usually be back to normal.

Your midwife will check your blood pressure regularly.
Constipation

Constipation is common during pregnancy. This is because your intestines are working more slowly. Remember to drink water and keep active.
Examples of other common discomforts

Here are some additional discomforts that are common during pregnancy:

    back pain
    varicose veins
    haemorrhoids
    heartburn
    heart palpitations

    shortness of breath
    urinary tract infection.

When and where should I seek medical care? 

If you are worried or have questions, you can contact a midwifery clinic. 
If you need urgent care

If you have a lot of stomach pain, contact a healthcare provider immediately.

Contact one of these clinics:

    An emergency department if the condition occurs during the first half of your pregnancy.  
    A maternity ward if the condition occurs during the second half of your pregnancy.

Call 1177 for advice  

Call the 1177 helpline if you need advice on what to do. Your call will be answered by a nurse. The nurse can speak both Swedish and English. Help is sometimes available in other languages. Call 0046 771 11 77 00 if you are calling from a phone with a foreign number.
Get help from an interpreter

You can get help from an interpreter if you do not speak Swedish. Let the clinic know you need an interpreter when you book your appointment.


Revision date:
2022-09-12
Editor:
Rebecka Persson, 1177.se, National Editorial Team
Reviewer:
Anne-Charlotte Jonsson, Midwife, Maternity Care Unit, Stockholm


Abortion
Abort - engelska

An abortion is when a person chooses to end their pregnancy. It is the pregnant person's decision whether they want to have an abortion. This is called the right to choose abortion.

This right is described in a special law called the Abortion Act.

Läs texten på svenska här.
Make an appointment

Contact an abortion clinic if you are considering having an abortion.

The healthcare staff are sworn to secrecy. This means that they are not allowed to tell anyone about your visit.

At the abortion clinic, a midwife or doctor will examine you to determine how far along you are in the pregnancy.

Together, you will discuss which method of abortion is best for you. There are medical abortions and surgical abortions. Medical abortion is the most common method.

They will also help with contraception, if needed.
The medical abortion process

You go to the abortion clinic, where you are given a tablet that will induce abortion. You will then be sent home with some additional medicine.

One or two days after taking the first tablet, it is time to take the medicines you brought home with you. After a few hours, you will begin to bleed. It is common to see clots of blood as well. The pregnancy is expelled from the body along with the blood.

Some people may have to come back to the abortion clinic and finish the abortion there. This may happen, for example, if you have been pregnant for more than 10 weeks.
The surgical abortion process

A surgical abortion is a minor operation that is performed in a hospital.

First, you will be put to sleep with anaesthesia. The doctor will then insert a tube through the vagina up to the uterus to suction out the foetus.

Once you have woken up from the surgery, you will stay in the hospital for a while before going home.
When can I have an abortion?

You can have an abortion up to the 18th week of pregnancy.

The weeks of pregnancy are counted from the first day of your last period, i.e. they are not counted from the day of conception.
Abortion after week 18

It is possible to have an abortion after the 18th week of pregnancy. However, the National Board of Health and Welfare must give permission for the abortion. A counsellor at the abortion clinic will help you to apply for the abortion.
How you will feel after the abortion

After the abortion, it is a good idea to rest for a day or so.

It is common to bleed afterwards and feel some pain. At first, the bleeding will be similar to a period, or a little more. The bleeding will stop after a few weeks. How long the bleeding lasts varies from one person to another.

An abortion does not make it harder to get pregnant in the future. Nor does it put you at increased risk of a future miscarriage.
Counselling before and after an abortion

It may feel good to talk to someone. Both before and after having an abortion.

You can make an appointment for counselling at the abortion clinic.
When and where should I seek medical care?

There is a risk of getting an infection in your uterus after an abortion.

Seek medical care if any of the following applies to you:

    You develop a fever of over 38°C.
    You have pain in your abdomen.
    You have bad-smelling discharge.

Contact the abortion clinic that performed the abortion. If they cannot attend to you, seek care from an emergency department or a gynaecological emergency department.
Call 1177 for advice

Call the 1177 helpline if you need advice on what to do.
Your call will be answered by a nurse.
The nurse can speak both Swedish and English. Help is sometimes available in other languages.

Call +46 771-11 77 00 if you are calling from a phone with a foreign number.

Revision date:
2022-06-17
Editor:
Kristin Rohman, 1177.se, National Editorial Team 
Reviewer:
Johanna Katz-Dalsgaard, Midwife, Södertälje Hospital, Stockholm, Stockholm

Nausea during pregnancy
Att må illa under graviditeten - engelska

It is common to feel nauseous and vomit when you are pregnant. Many people call this morning sickness. Although unpleasant, it is not harmful to you or your baby. There are some things you can do to feel better.

Nausea is most common in early pregnancy. Most people stop feeling sick around week 20 of their pregnancy. Some people feel sick throughout their whole pregnancy.

Du kan läsa texten på svenska här.
How you may feel

Some people feel sick at certain times of the day. Others feel sick all the time. It is common for certain smells to make the nausea worse.

Some may feel so nauseous that they vomit.
Extreme nausea

Some people become very nauseous and vomit very often. In such cases, there is a risk of dehydration and not getting enough nutrients.

If you are feeling this poorly, you may need hospital care for periods of time.
When and where should I seek medical care?

Most people who feel nauseous during pregnancy do not need medical care. Talk to a midwife (barnmorska) if you have any questions or need advice.

Contact a healthcare provider if you cannot keep any food or drink down.

Contact one of these clinics:

    A midwifery clinic (barnmorskemottagning)
    A healthcare centre
    An out-of-hours service.

Get help from an interpreter

You can get help from an interpreter if you do not speak Swedish.

Let the clinic know you need an interpreter when you book your appointment.
Call 1177 for advice

Call the 1177 helpline if you need advice on what to do. Your call will be answered by a nurse. The nurse can speak both Swedish and English. Help is sometimes available in other languages. Call +46 771 11 77 00 if you are calling from a phone with a foreign number.
Self-help tips

Here are some tips that may help:

    Get some fresh air and exercise.
    Get rest.
    Avoid stress.
    Try to eat something as soon as you wake up.
    Eat often, but small portions at a time.
    Avoid foods that are fatty, spicy or fried.
    Try to drink tea or eat foods that contain some ginger.

If you vomit a lot, you will need to drink a little more than usual.
If you need support

Feeling nauseous and vomiting during pregnancy is often taxing. It may feel better to talk to someone about your symptoms. For example, you can talk to a midwife.
Treatment

There are medicines that can help. For example, some people feel better with medicine for motion sickness.

Talk to a doctor, midwife or pharmacist before using any medicine while pregnant.

Some people find that acupuncture helps.
Some people may need hospital treatment

If you are extremely nauseous and vomit a lot, you may need hospital treatment. You can then be given nutrition directly into your bloodstream by IV drip.
What causes nausea during pregnancy?

The nausea is caused by the hormones in your body when you are pregnant. Some people react to these hormones more than others.

The nausea may be worse when you are tired, stressed or have not eaten anything.

Nausea is particularly common if you are pregnant with more than one child.
It is not harmful

Feeling nauseous and vomiting are not harmful to you or your baby. The baby is getting the nutrients it needs.

Revision date:
2023-12-01
Editor:
Rebecka Persson, 1177.se, National Editorial Team
Reviewer:
Anne-Charlotte Jonsson, Midwife, Maternity Care Unit, Stockholm

Pain in your pelvic area during pregnancy
Att ha ont i bäckenet under graviditeten - engelska

When you are pregnant, the joints in your body become more flexible. You may experience pain in your pelvic area. This is common and usually goes away after childbirth.

Pain in your pelvic area during pregnancy is called pelvic girdle pain. This was previously called symphysis pubis dysfunction.

Läs texten på svenska här.
Where does it usually hurt?

It is common to have pain in the following places:

    The lower back.
    The buttocks.
    The hips.
    The pubic bone.
    The back of the thighs.
    The groin.

When does it hurt?

It may hurt so much that you find it difficult to move around as usual.

Some people have pain almost all the time. Others have pain only sometimes.

It is common for it to hurt more later in the day than in the morning.
When and where should I seek medical care?

Seek medical care if you are pregnant and have pain in your back or pelvis.

You can contact a midwife (barnmorska) or a physiotherapist.

See a physiotherapist if you have pain three months after giving birth.
Call 1177 for advice

Call 1177 for help on what to do. Your call will be answered by a nurse. If needed, they can tell you where to go for treatment.

The nurses speak Swedish and English. Help is sometimes available in other languages.

Call 0046 771-11 77 00 if you are calling from a phone with a foreign number.
Get help from an interpreter

You can get help from an interpreter if you do not speak Swedish.
Let the clinic know you need an interpreter when you book your appointment.
Everyday tips to reduce pain

Here are some tips you can try:

    Alternate between standing, sitting and walking.
    Take shorter steps than usual when walking.
    Take several shorter walks instead of one long walk.
    Take a lift, if available.
    Wear comfortable shoes.
    Support the lumbar area of your back with a pillow when sitting.
    Place a pillow between your knees when lying on your side.
    Put something warm on the area that hurts, such as a heating pad.

Avoid the following:

    Pushing a heavy pram or shopping trolley.
    Sitting cross-legged.
    Lifting heavy things.
    Walking up and down stairs.
    Bending down too often.

It is a good idea to exercise your muscles

It is a good idea to exercise both your back and your abdominal muscles. These muscles can support the pelvis.

A physiotherapist can advise you.
Treatment
Ett bäckenbälte som sitter under magen på en gravid person.
A pregnancy support belt can provide some relief.

You can get help from a midwife or physiotherapist. Here are some examples:

    You can buy or rent a pregnancy support belt.
    You can rent a so-called TENS machine. This can relieve pain using a weak electrical impulse.
    You can get acupuncture.

What causes pelvic girdle pain?

The joints in your body become more flexible when you are pregnant. This is due to hormones.

As a result of this, your pelvis may become less stable. You may then experience pain.
If you get pregnant again

Pelvic girdle pain will often come back during a new pregnancy.

If you are planning to become pregnant again, you can prepare your body by doing certain exercises. You can get advice from a physiotherapist.

Revision date:
2022-06-03
Editor:
Rebecka Persson, 1177.se, National Editorial Team
Reviewer:
Anne-Charlotte Jonsson, Midwife, Maternity Care Unit, Stockholm

Pre-eclampsia
Havandeskapsförgiftning - engelska

Pre-eclampsia is a condition you can get when you are pregnant. It is characterised by high blood pressure. It can affect both you and your baby. You may require rest and medicine to lower your blood pressure.

Du kan läsa texten på svenska här.

Pre-eclampsia is sometimes called pregnancy-induced hypertension and toxaemia.
Symptoms

Many people do not notice any symptoms of the condition. It is the midwife who detects it during a check-up.
When and where should I seek medical care?

When you are pregnant, you will visit the midwifery clinic (barnmorskemottagningen) several times.
If you develop pre-eclampsia, you will need to come in for extra check-ups.
If you need urgent care

People who develop the condition usually have it towards the end of their pregnancy – usually during the last six weeks. But it can develop earlier than this.

You may need medical attention more urgently if any of the following apply:

    You suddenly get a headache that does not feel normal.
    You have problems with your eyesight.
    You have a lot of pain in the upper part of your stomach, especially on the right side under your ribs.
    You feel nauseated and vomit during the second half of your pregnancy.
    Your face, hands or feet swell up. The swelling comes on suddenly.

    You feel generally unwell.

Contact one of these clinics:

    A midwifery clinic.
    An out-of-hours service.

If it is closed or they cannot attend to you, seek care from one of these clinics:

    An emergency department if the condition occurs during the first half of your pregnancy.
    A maternity ward if the condition occurs during the second half of your pregnancy.

Call 1177 for advice

Call the 1177 helpline if you need advice on what to do.

Your call will be answered by a nurse. The nurse can speak both Swedish and English.
Help is sometimes available in other languages.

Call +46 771 11 77 00 if you are calling from a phone with a foreign number.
Self-help tips

If you have pre-eclampsia, it is important to rest and take it easy.
Examinations

A midwife will measure your blood pressure when you visit the midwifery clinic.

You will be asked to provide a urine sample.

You may also be examined by ultrasound. This examination can show images of the baby in your womb.

You may also be examined using a device that measures your baby’s heart rate. This is called a CTG.
You can get help from an interpreter

You can get help from an interpreter if you do not speak Swedish.
Let the clinic know you need an interpreter when you book your appointment.
Treatments

Some people may be given a medicine called blood thinner early in the pregnancy. This may be done, for example, if you had pre-eclampsia in a previous pregnancy. The medicine may prevent you from developing the condition again.

If you have developed pre-eclampsia, you may be given medicine to lower your blood pressure.

Some people are hospitalised. This makes it easier for healthcare workers to monitor your blood pressure and how you are feeling.

If rest and treatment are not sufficient, the baby may need to be delivered early.
After the baby is born

Pre-eclampsia will go away after the baby is born.
Some people need to take medicines for a few months after giving birth.

You may be more likely to develop certain diseases later in life.
For example, you may be more likely to develop diseases of the heart and blood vessels, called cardiovascular diseases.
That is why it is a good idea to maintain a healthy lifestyle, as then you are less likely to get sick.

Revision date:
2022-05-04
Editor:
Kristin Rohman, 1177.se, National Editorial Team 
Reviewer:
Caroline Lilliecreutz, Gynaecologist and Obstetrician, Universitetssjukhuset, Linköping

Braxton Hicks contractions and labour contractions
Sammandragningar och värkar - engelska

The uterus is a muscle. Sometimes during pregnancy, the uterus will tighten and then relax. These are called Braxton Hicks contractions, or false labour. The uterus also tightens and relaxes when it is time to give birth. These contractions are called labour.

Du kan läsa texten på svenska här.
What Braxton Hicks contractions feel like

When you have a contraction, your stomach gets hard. It may feel uncomfortable. But it usually does not hurt.

Braxton Hicks contractions usually come at irregular intervals. They may come as you move or exert yourself, such as walking fast or lifting something.
It is common to have Braxton Hicks contractions

Braxton Hicks contractions often go away when you rest or relax.

It is common to have Braxton Hicks contractions from midway through your pregnancy until it is time to give birth.
How labour contractions feel

When the body starts to get ready for childbirth, you will have labour contractions.

Labour contractions usually hurt more. They come at regular intervals.

Labour contractions get stronger and more severe as labour progresses.
You may feel pressure in your lower abdomen. You may also feel pain in your back.
When it is time to go to the maternity ward

When the labour contractions are about two to three minutes apart, it is usually time to go to the maternity ward at the hospital.

You can go there earlier than this if you feel you need help. Always call the maternity ward of the hospital before going there.

Read more here about when it is time to go to the hospital maternity ward.
When and where should I seek medical care?

You do not need to seek medical care if you are having Braxton Hicks contractions.

It may be difficult to tell the difference between Braxton Hicks contractions and labour contractions. Contact a midwife (barnmorska) at the midwifery clinic if you are worried or uncertain.
Get help from an interpreter

You can get help from an interpreter if you do not speak Swedish.  Let the clinic know you need an interpreter when you book your appointment.
If urgent care is needed

You may need medical attention more urgently if any of the following apply:

    You are having Braxton Hicks contractions, and blood or amniotic fluid is coming from your vagina at the same time. This may mean you have gone into labour.

Contact one of these clinics:

    An emergency department if it occurs during the first half of your pregnancy.
    A maternity ward if it occurs during the second half of your pregnancy.

Call 1177 for advice

Call 1177 for help on what to do.

Your call will be answered by a nurse. The nurse can speak both Swedish and English.
Help is sometimes available in other languages.

Call +46 771 11 77 00 if you are calling from a phone with a foreign number.
Examinations

If you are having Braxton Hicks or labour contractions, the midwife may need to examine you by ultrasound.

They may also perform a urine test.
Treatment

You may need medicine if you are having labour contractions before it is time to give birth.

You do not need to do anything special when you feel Braxton Hicks contractions. But the following may provide some relief:

    You can take a hot bath or shower. 
    You can rest and relax.
    A simple massage may help you to relax.
    You can try different body positions.

The same things may help and relieve pain when you are in labour.
You can read more here about pain relief during childbirth.

Revision date:
2022-04-22
Editor:
Kristin Rohman, 1177.se, National Editorial Team 
Reviewer:
Anne-Charlotte Jonsson, Midwife, Maternity Care Unit, Stockholm

Alcohol and pregnancy
Alkohol och graviditet - engelska

Do not drink alcohol when you are pregnant. Alcohol contains substances that could harm the baby in the womb. If you find it difficult to stop drinking alcohol, you can get help.

You should also avoid alcohol if you are trying to get pregnant.
Alcohol can make it harder to get pregnant.

Du kan läsa texten på svenska här.
Self-help tips

It may feel strange not to drink alcohol if you usually do.
But it is often easier to change habits than you think.

If you have an alcohol addiction, it may be difficult to stop drinking.
But it is possible to stop. The most important thing is that you want to.

It may make it easier to stop if you keep reminding yourself that you want your baby to be as healthy as possible. Pregnancy may also curb your craving for alcohol.
What happens in your body?

Alcohol contains harmful substances.

When you drink alcohol, these harmful substances enter your bloodstream.
Your blood passes into the placenta. From the placenta, the harmful substances enter the baby’s body.

The harmful substances also enter the amniotic fluid that the baby drinks.

The more alcohol you drink and the more often you drink it, the greater the risk of harm to the baby.
The impact of alcohol

Here is what could happen if you drink alcohol when you are pregnant:

    The risk of miscarriage or death of the baby in the womb may increase.
    The baby does not grow properly. As a result, the baby may be smaller than it should be.
    The baby’s brain may be damaged. This may affect the baby’s development and behaviour.

If a baby is harmed by alcohol, it is called foetal alcohol syndrome (FAS).
As good as possible

You may feel bad if you have drunk alcohol while pregnant.
It is common to feel some shame and guilt.

But the most important thing is not to expose your baby to more alcohol.
Think about how to make things as good as possible from now on.
When and where should I seek treatment?

Seek treatment if you need help to stop drinking alcohol.
You can contact one of these clinics:

    A midwifery clinic (barnmorskemottagning).
    A healthcare centre (vårdcentral).

Get help from an interpreter

You can get help from an interpreter if you do not speak Swedish. Let the clinic know you need an interpreter when you book your appointment.
Call 1177 for advice

Call 1177 for help on what to do.

Your call will be answered by a nurse. The nurse can speak both Swedish and English. Help is sometimes available in other languages.

Call +46 771 11 77 00 if you are calling from a phone with a foreign number.
Treatment

If you find it difficult to stop drinking alcohol, you can get treatment.

There are several types of treatment.
Counselling is a common form of treatment that may help.

Revision date:
2022-04-19
Editor:
Kristin Rohman, 1177.se, National Editorial Team 
Reviewer:
Caroline Lilliecreutz, Gynaecologist and Obstetrician, Universitetssjukhuset, Linköping

Tobacco and pregnancy
Tobak och graviditet - engelska

It is harmful to use tobacco when you are pregnant. The harmful substances found in tobacco will travel to the baby in your womb. You should therefore avoid using tobacco when you are pregnant. If you find it difficult to stop, you can get help. Tobacco is found in products such as cigarettes.

You should also avoid tobacco if you are trying to get pregnant.
Tobacco can make it harder to get pregnant.

Du kan läsa texten på svenska här.
Self-help tips

Anyone can stop using tobacco. The most important thing is that you want to stop.
Remember that cravings for tobacco usually only last a few minutes.

It is often easier to stop during pregnancy. You may be motivated by wanting your baby to be as healthy as possible.

Pregnancy may also curb your craving for tobacco.
Different kinds of tobacco products

Examples of tobacco products include cigarettes, hookah, e-cigarettes and snus, which you put under your lip. All of these contain harmful substances, such as nicotine.

E-cigarettes are available without nicotine. But there are other substances in e-cigarettes that can be harmful. That is why you should also avoid e-cigarettes during pregnancy.
What happens in your body?

Tobacco contains harmful substances.

When you use tobacco, these harmful substances enter your bloodstream. Your blood passes into the placenta. From the placenta, the harmful substances enter the baby’s body.
The impact of tobacco

Here is what could happen if you use tobacco when you are pregnant:

    The risk of miscarriage may increase.
    The baby may not grow properly.
    The placenta may detach prematurely.
    Labour may start prematurely.

Tobacco can increase the risk of the baby dying in the womb or in the first six months after birth.
Think of the future

You may feel bad if you have used tobacco while pregnant. It is common to feel some shame and guilt.

The most important thing is not to expose your baby to more tobacco. Think about how to make things as good as possible from now on.
When and where should I seek treatment?

Seek treatment if you need help to stop using tobacco.

You can contact one of these clinics:
• A midwifery clinic (barnmorskemottagning).
• A healthcare centre (vårdcentral).
Get help from an interpreter

You can get help from an interpreter if you do not speak Swedish. Let the clinic know you need an interpreter when you book your appointment.
Call 1177 for advice

Call 1177 for help on what to do.
Your call will be answered by a nurse. The nurse can speak both Swedish and English. Help is sometimes available in other languages.
Call +46 771 11 77 00 if you are calling from a phone with a foreign number.
Treatment

Nicotine gum or patches are available. They reduce the craving for tobacco. But such medicines are harmful to the baby.

Talk to a doctor if you need to use medicines with nicotine when you are pregnant or breastfeeding.

Revision date:
2022-04-19
Editor:
Kristin Rohman, 1177.se, National Editorial Team 
Reviewer:
Caroline Lilliecreutz, Gynaecologist and Obstetrician, Universitetssjukhuset, Linköping

Visiting the midwifery clinic (barnmorske-mottagningen)
Besök på barnmorskemottagningen - engelska

When you are pregnant, you may visit a midwifery clinic. These visits are to see how you and the baby in your womb are doing. You will be given advice and help to prepare for the birth of your child. The visits are free of charge.

Du kan läsa texten på svenska här.

Contact a midwifery clinic as soon as you know you are pregnant.

You can find midwifery clinics here. The page is in Swedish.
What happens at the visits?

At the midwifery clinic, you will meet a midwife (barnmorska). Here are some examples of what you may talk about:

    How you are feeling.
    Whether you have been pregnant before.
    If you have or previously had any illnesses.
    Your thoughts about the pregnancy.

    Good foods to eat when you are pregnant.
    How you can move your body and exercise during the pregnancy.
    How tobacco, alcohol, drugs and medicines can affect your baby.
    Your thoughts about giving birth to your baby and breastfeeding.

You will also learn about different tests that provide information about the development of the foetus in the womb. These tests are called foetal diagnostics.

You will also undergo examinations and provide samples.
The staff are sworn to secrecy

Everyone who works in healthcare is sworn to secrecy. No staff member is allowed to tell anyone else about your visits to the midwifery clinic.
How often do visits take place?

You usually visit the midwife about six to ten times during your pregnancy. The number of times you need to go varies.

Towards the end of your pregnancy, the visits will become more frequent.
Tests and checks

During the visits, the midwife will perform tests and examinations. These are done to find out how both you and your baby are doing.

It is common for the midwife to perform tests on your blood and urine.

Other things the midwife will usually check:

    Your blood pressure.

    How much you weigh.
    How your uterus is growing.
    How the baby is moving.
    Your baby's heartbeat.

Information about you is collected in a medical record

The midwife writes important things about your pregnancy in a digital medical record. The staff at the maternity ward will read your medical record when you are in labour.
Meetings for parents

The midwifery clinic organises meetings for expectant parents. At these, you meet others who are also going to be parents.

At the meetings, you are given information and advice. Common topics include giving birth, pain relief that can be given during labour, the newborn baby, and breastfeeding.
You can get extra support

If you are worried or scared about giving birth, you can get extra support.
Let the midwife know if there are things you are worried about. It can be anything.
Some people need to go to specialist prenatal care (specialistmödravården)

If you have a certain illness or condition, you may need to go to something called specialist prenatal care.

The midwife or doctor at the midwifery clinic will tell you if you need this special care.
Get help from an interpreter

If you do not speak Swedish, you can get help from an interpreter during your healthcare visits. Let the clinic know you need an interpreter when you book your appointment.
Return visit to the midwifery clinic

After giving birth, you will need to go for a return visit to the midwifery clinic. The return visit will take place after 2 to 16 weeks.

At the return visit, you will talk about the delivery and about breastfeeding.

The midwife will perform a gynaecological examination. The midwife will also talk about using protection against another pregnancy.

You may have several return visits.

Revision date:
2022-04-08
Editor:
Kristin Rohman, 1177.se, National Editorial Team 
Reviewer:
Anne-Charlotte Jonsson, Midwife, Maternity Care Unit, Stockholm

Pregnant or recently given birth? Make your voice heard
Gravid eller nyss fött barn? Gör din röst hörd - engelska

If you are pregnant or have recently given birth, you now have the chance to participate in Graviditetsenkäten (the Pregnancy Survey). You will be asked questions about how you felt about the care you received during your pregnancy, after giving birth, and one year after giving birth. The survey also includes questions about your health. Each pregnancy and childbirth experience is unique, so your participation is important to us. Your feedback will help us improve the care.

Log in and enter your contact details to participate. Each part of the survey takes about five minutes to answer.

Läs texten på svenska här.
Who can take part in the survey?

The survey is divided into three sessions. You answer one section at a time. You will receive an email in your inbox here at the 1177.se website if any of the following applies to you:

    You are in week 25 of pregnancy.
    You gave birth eight weeks ago.
    You gave birth a year ago.

The email contains a clickable link to the relevant section of the survey. You’re free to complete all sections, but you don’t have to. If you are 25 weeks pregnant, you will receive all sections, and you can fill in one section or more.

To receive the survey, you must first log in and enter your contact details.
How do I take the survey?

    Log in to 1177.se.
    Go to settings and enter your email address or mobile phone number.
    Choose whether you want to be contacted by email or text message.
    Tick the “aviseringar” (notification) box, and you will receive a notice when the survey has been sent to you.

Once you have received the survey, you have six weeks to complete it.
What kind of questions are asked in the survey?

You will be asked questions about your experiences of and opinions about the care you received. For example, you may be asked questions about how you were treated by the midwife and other staff.

You will also be asked questions about your health, such as how you have been feeling during your pregnancy, or how you felt after giving birth.
Why is this survey being done?

The purpose of this survey is to give your region information to help develop and improve healthcare. The regions would like to improve care before, during and after childbirth.
Who formulated the questions in the survey?

The questions in the survey were formulated by Sveriges Kommuner och Regioner, SKR, in collaboration with Bristningsregistret, Graviditetsregistret, Svenska Barnmorskeförbundet, and SFOG – Svensk förening för obstetrik och gynekologi.

Participation in this survey is voluntary, and so is registering with Graviditetsregistret (the Swedish Pregnancy Register). Your responses will not be linked to you personally. Healthcare professionals can’t see if you have taken the survey, and they can’t access your responses.

The results will be presented at a group level once enough people have responded. According to law, personal data, like your name and your personal identity number, must always be anonymised before the results can be disclosed or used in reports or for research purposes.
Who can answer questions about the pregnancy survey?

Please contact a midwife if you have any questions about how to answer the survey. Are you experiencing any problems, or do you need support during your pregnancy or after giving birth? Please contact a midwife or health centre.

Revision date:
2023-11-10
Editor:
Jenny Andersson, 1177.se, National Editorial Team 
Reviewer:
Malin Vallentin Harman, Kommunikatör, Sveriges kommuner och regioner, SKR, Stockholm

Information can be found at: https://www.1177.se/en/other-languages/other-languages/graviditet---andra-sprak/
Retrived from: https://www.1177.se/en/other-languages/other-languages/graviditet---andra-sprak/

