HIV is a virus that can spread between people and cause infection. If you have the virus, you may develop a condition called AIDS. There is treatment for HIV and AIDS.

If you have HIV but are receiving HIV treatment, you will not infect others.

HIV is an abbreviation for human immunodeficiency virus.

Läs texten på svenska här.
Symptoms

HIV is most commonly asymptomatic, meaning that there are no symptoms.
Symptoms that may appear early on

Some symptoms may appear two to three weeks after a person becomes infected.

Here are some examples of such symptoms:

    fever
    sore throat
    swollen and tender lymph nodes.

Symptoms that may appear later

It can sometimes take years before symptoms appear in an infected person.

Here are some examples of such symptoms:

    fatigue
    night sweats
    shingles.

When and where should I seek medical care?

Contact a healthcare centre (vårdcentral), a dermatology clinic or a sexual health clinic if you suspect you may have contracted HIV.

If you are aged 25 or younger, you can usually contact a youth guidance centre (ungdomsmottagning).

Testing for HIV is always free at all clinics.
Call 1177 for advice

Call the 1177 helpline if you need advice on what to do. Your call will be answered by a nurse. The nurse can speak both Swedish and English. Help is sometimes available in other languages. Call +46 771 11 77 00 if you are calling from a phone with a foreign number.
If urgent care is needed

If you are certain that you have been exposed to infection, contact the infectious disease clinic of a hospital immediately. You should do this, for example, if the condom broke while you were having sex with someone who has HIV but is not being treated for it.

Contact an out-of-hours service or an emergency department if the infectious disease clinic is closed.
How can I reduce my risk of getting HIV and AIDS?

Here is how you can protect yourself from HIV infection:

    Use a condom when having vaginal sex, anal sex or oral sex with someone who has a penis.
    Put a condom on sex toys you put in your mouth, vagina or anus if you use them with someone else.
    Do not share needles with anyone else.

How HIV is transmitted

You can get HIV through blood, semen or vaginal secretions.

How children can be infected

A child can get HIV in different ways:

    The child gets HIV from their mother during pregnancy.
    The child gets HIV during childbirth.
    The child gets HIV through breast milk.

The risk is very low if the mother is using anti-HIV medicines.

How is HIV not transmitted?

You will not get HIV by having sex with someone who has HIV but is receiving treatment for it.

You cannot get HIV by hugging or kissing someone.

HIV is also not spread by using the same towel or coffee mug as someone else.
Learning you have HIV

Learning you have HIV may be difficult to come to terms with. It may therefore be a good idea to bring a loved one along with you to the first few visits.
Treatment

There is no way to get rid of HIV completely. But there are medicines that reduce the amount of virus in your body. The treatment also prevents you from developing AIDS.

Children with HIV

All children with HIV in Sweden are treated with medicine.

Children with HIV can do the same things as other children, such as go to school and play.
Communicable Diseases Act

According to the Communicable Diseases Act, you are required to tell the person you are having sex with that you have HIV. This is called the duty to inform. Your doctor may waive your duty to inform if treatment is working well.
Share article

Revision date:
2022-06-16
Editor:
Katja Öster, 1177.se, National Editorial Team
Reviewer:
Pernilla Albinsson, Nurse, HIV Clinic/Infectious Disease Clinic 2, Karolinska University Hospital and SMSH (Stockholm Sexual Health Clinic), Stockholm

Retrived from: https://www.1177.se/en/other-languages/other-languages/symtomsjukdom---andra-sprak/hiv-och-aids---andra-sprak-engelska/


Measles is a disease caused by a virus. Some people become seriously ill. The disease is rare in Sweden because the measles vaccine is included in the vaccination programme for children.

Symtoms
Rash
You develop a rash on your body.

When you have measles, it is common to have these symptoms:

    You have a cough.
    Your eyes are irritated, red and sensitive to light.
    You have a high fever.

You develop a rash

After a few days, you develop a rash. The rash usually appears on the face first and then spreads to the rest of the body. The rash may look different on different skin types.

On fair skin, the rash will be bright red at first, and then darken after a few days. On dark skin, the rash tends to be darker from the start. The rash may sometimes be hard to see.
You may be ill for a long time

It is common to have a fever and feel ill for five to six days after developing the rash. It then usually takes another week before you feel better. It may take much longer if you develop a complication.
When and where should I seek medical care?

Contact a healthcare provider if you think you or someone close to you has measles.

You can contact one of these clinics:

    A healthcare centre (vårdcentral).
    A paediatric clinic (barnläkarmottagning). 

Call before you go

Measles is highly contagious.

Call first if you intend to go to a clinic. Then the staff can see you without putting others at risk.
Get help from an interpreter

You can get help from an interpreter if you do not speak Swedish.

Let the clinic know you need an interpreter when you book your appointment.
Call 1177 for advice

Call the 1177 helpline if you need advice on what to do. Your call will be answered by a nurse. The nurse can speak both Swedish and English.

Help is sometimes available in other languages. Call +46 771 11 77 00 if you are calling from a phone with a foreign number.
Complications

It is normal to develop complications when you have measles. Possible complications include ear infections,  sinus infections and pneumonia.

Measles can also lead to serious inflammation of the brain, but this is rare.
How is measles transmitted?

Measles is very easily transmitted when a sick person coughs or sneezes. Small droplets containing the virus are then spread through the air. The virus can spread to several rooms or even an entire section of a building.

You can get infected if you have not had measles and have not been vaccinated. After infection, it takes about two weeks before you become ill. At most, you will be infectious for five days after the rash appears.

You cannot be infected again if you have had measles once.
Treatment

There is no treatment for measles. Medicines that lower the fever may make you feel a little better.

It usually feels good to rest in a cool, dark room. It is generally good to avoid bright lights, as they could irritate your eyes.

Some people may need hospital treatment.
You can get vaccinated against measles

There is a vaccine against measles. Ask about it at a healthcare centre.

Revision date:
2022-06-03
Editor:
Ingela Andersson, 1177.se, National Editorial Team
Reviewer:
Lars Rombo,  Doctor, Specialist in Infectious Diseases, Infectious Disease Clinic, Mälarsjukhuset, Eskilstuna

Retrived from:
https://www.1177.se/en/other-languages/other-languages/symtomsjukdom---andra-sprak/massling---engelska/


THE TEXT ABOVE IS ABOUT MEASLES

-------------------------------------------------------------------------

THE TEXT BELOW IS ABOUT TUBERCULOSIS - TB

Tuberculosis – TB

Tuberculosis is a disease of the lungs. The disease causes coughing for several weeks. Most people recover completely with treatment.

Du kan läsa texten på svenska här.
What are some signs that you may have tuberculosis in your lungs?

When you have tuberculosis in your lungs, it is common to cough up phlegm. You are usually sick for more than three weeks.

You may also have these symptoms:

    You feel weak.
    You feel tired.
    You have a fever.
    You sweat at night.

Some children become seriously ill

Children up to school age can become seriously ill from tuberculosis. They get a fever and feel weak.

Children between the ages of about six and twelve usually do not get very sick. They rarely have a cough. Their symptoms are often a fever for several weeks, and feeling tired and out of sorts.

From adolescence onwards, children can get as sick as adults, but often recover quickly with treatment.
When and where should I seek medical care?

Contact a healthcare provider if you think your child has tuberculosis. You should also contact a healthcare provider if your child is under six years of age and has been in contact with someone with TB. You should do this even if your child is not sick.

You can contact one of these clinics:

    A healthcare centre (vårdcentral). 
    A paediatric clinic (barnläkarmottagning). 

Call for advice

Call 1177 for help on what to do. Your call will be answered by a nurse. If needed, they can tell you where to go for treatment.

Tuberculosis is caused by a bacterium that can be spread between people. When someone with tuberculosis in their lungs sneezes, coughs or spits, the bacteria can get into the air. When you breathe in that air, you can become infected.

It may take a long time before you get sick.

Tuberculosis is most often spread to people who have close contact with someone who has infectious TB. The bacteria are spread mainly within the family and others with whom the sick person lives. Children get sick more easily than adults, but do not infect others. Children up to school age are usually not infectious.
Treatment

There is good treatment for tuberculosis.

You will be treated with one or more medicines. It takes a long time to treat tuberculosis, often several months.
You can be vaccinated against tuberculosis

Revision date:
2022-05-13
Editor:
Ingela Andersson, 1177.se, National Editorial Team
Reviewer:
Lars-Olof Larsson, Physician, Specialist in Pulmonary Diseases, Capital Region of Denmark

Retrived from: https://www.1177.se/en/other-languages/other-languages/symtomsjukdom---andra-sprak/tuberkulos-tbc-engelska/


Gastroenteritis

Gastroenteritis is very common and usually passes quickly. You may feel nauseated, vomit and have diarrhoea. If you have gastroenteritis, it is important that you drink more than usual.

This text deals with gastroenteritis in both children and adults.

Symptoms

If you have gastroenteritis, you may experience any of the following:

    You feel nauseated.
    You are vomiting.
    You have diarrhoea.
    You have stomach pain.
    You have a fever.
    Your body hurts.

Self-help tips

Drink more than usual. Try to drink frequently, a little at a time.

A young child may need to drink from a spoon. You can try ice lollies if the child does not want to drink.

Here are some more tips for gastroenteritis:

    If a young child is sick, let them nurse or give them formula more often than usual.
    Use rehydration tablets or sachets. This is a good idea if you are vomiting or have diarrhoea.
    Once the gastroenteritis has passed, you can go back to eating normal food. Start with small portions.
    There are medicines that can stop the diarrhoea temporarily. These can be used by adults.

When and where should I seek treatment?

Most people who get gastroenteritis do not need medical care. The symptoms usually go away on their own.

Call 1177 for help on what to do. Your call will be answered by a nurse. If needed, they can tell you where to go for treatment.


You need to contact a vårdcentral (healthcare centre) for urgent care if any of the following applies:

    A child less than six months old is vomiting and has diarrhoea.
    The person with gastroenteritis is not taking in any fluids at all.
    The person with gastroenteritis has blood in their vomit or faeces.
    The person with gastroenteritis has a high fever and chills.
    The person with gastroenteritis has a lot of stomach pain. It hurts even after the person has vomited or had diarrhoea.

Some vårdcentral are open evenings and weekends.

What causes gastroenteritis?

Gastroenteritis is caused by a virus or bacteria. Winter vomiting disease (norovirus) is a common form of gastroenteritis. It is caused by a virus.

A virus can be transmitted if you are in close contact with a person who is ill. It can also be transmitted through food and drink that contains the bacteria or virus.
How to reduce your risk of getting gastroenteritis

Here are some ways you can reduce the risk of you or others gettinggastroenteritis:

    Wash your hands often and thoroughly. Use liquid soap.
    Keep the toilet clean.
    Keep the changing table or any other place you change nappies clean.
    Keep things clean when cooking. Use different knives and cutting boards for meat and vegetables.
    Eat food that has been properly cooked.
    Avoid cooking for other people when you have gastroenteritis.

Treatment

Most people do not need treatment. Some people who have difficulty taking in fluids may need hospital care.

If the gastroenteritis is caused by bacteria, you may need treatment with antibiotics.

Revision date:
2021-11-26
Editor:
Rebecka Persson, 1177.se, National Editorial Team
Reviewer:
Jonas Hedlund, Doctor, Specialist in Infectious Diseases, Karolinska Universitetssjukhuset, Solna, Solna

Retrived from: https://www.1177.se/en/other-languages/other-languages/symtomsjukdom---andra-sprak/magsjuka/

THE TEXT ABOVE IS ABOUT Gastroenteritis

-------------------------------------------------------------------------

THE TEXT BELOW IS ABOUT RSV in children

RSV in children

RSV (respiratory syncytial virus) infections are very common. Most children who get it will have cold-like symptoms. Some children may become very ill and need hospital care.

RSV is most common in autumn and winter.

Symptoms

An RSV infection may seem like a common cold. However, children less than six months old can become very ill. It often takes several weeks for the child to recover.

These are usually the first symptoms of RSV:

    The child has the sniffles and a stuffy nose.
    The child has a fever.
    The child has difficulty nursing, eating or drinking. The child becomes tired easily.

During the first few days, some children become very ill. They may have difficulty breathing. This can be seen in the following ways:

    The child is breathing quickly.
    The child’s stomach moves in and out when they are breathing.
    The child seems to be struggling to breathe.

Some children may have pauses in their breathing. In such cases, the child stops breathing altogether for short periods.
Severe cough

RSV can cause a severe cough. It may start a few days after the first symptoms appear. The child may cough a lot for several weeks.
When and where should I seek treatment?

Most people with RSV do not need medical care. The illness usually goes away on its own.

Contact a vårdcentral (healthcare centre) immediately if any of the following applies:

    The child is less than 3 months old and has a fever.
    The child is having difficulty breathing.
    The child cannot nurse, drink or eat.

If your child has pauses in their breathing, call 112 immediately.

Call 1177 for help on what to do. Your call will be answered by a nurse. If needed, they can tell you where to go for treatment.

How can I help my child at home?

Here is how you can help a child who is ill:

    Give your child nasal spray or nose drops with saline. This will help if your child has a stuffy nose.
    Use a special suction bulb to remove mucus from their nose. These are available pharmacies.
    Raise your child’s head higher than the rest of their body when they sleep. You can do this with using extra pillows.
    Give your child fluids often. For example, you can nurse or give formula more often than usual.
    Feed your child more often than usual if they cannot eat very much at a time.
    Give your child fever-reducing medicine if they are feeling very poorly due to fever. Ask your pharmacist which one to use. Talk to a doctor first if your child is less than six months old.

How is RSV transmitted?

RSV is usually transmitted when a person with the illness sneezes or coughs. Small droplets with the virus are formed. You can get infected if you get these droplets in your body.

RSV can also be transmitted when you touch a person who has the virus on them, for example by holding their hand. The virus can then get in your mouth or nose if you touch your face with your hands.
You can reduce your risk of RSV

Here is how you can reduce the risk of getting RSV:

    Wash your hands often.
    Keep your distance from other people, especially when indoors.
    Avoid contact with people who have a cold.
    Choose activities with others where you meet outdoors.

Some children become seriously ill

The risk of becoming seriously ill from RSV is greater if any of the following are true:

    The child is less than three months old.
    The child is less than one year old and was born more than five weeks prematurely.
    The child has a disease of the heart, lungs or nervous system, for example.

It is particularly important to protect children at risk of becoming seriously ill.
Treatment

A child who becomes very ill may need hospital care. At the hospital, the child will be given fluids and nourishment.

If the child is having difficulty breathing, they will be given help with this.
Medicine to prevent the virus

There is a medicine that prevents the virus from making a child very ill. It is given by a healthcare professional. A child who is at risk of becoming seriously ill from RSV may need this medicine.

Revision date:
2021-11-25
Editor:
Rebecka Persson, 1177.se, National Editorial Team
Reviewer:
Joachim Luthander, Paediatrician, Astrid Lindgren Children’s Hospital, Solna, Solna

Retrived from: https://www.1177.se/en/other-languages/other-languages/symtomsjukdom---andra-sprak/rs-virus-hos-barn/


Fever in children

Having a fever means that your body temperature is higher than usual. It is the body’s way of defending itself against infection. Children often get a fever.

It is common to get a fever when, for example, you have a cold, cough or sore throat. Fever is common in children, especially young children.

A fever is considered to be a body temperature of 38°C or higher.

Fever is usually not serious. However, it can be serious if the fever is high.
What symptoms does a feverish child have?

The child will show one or more of the following symptoms:

    The child’s body is warm.
    The child is tired.
    The child seems unhappy and irritable.
    The child is sleeping more, or less, than usual.
    The child is not eating or drinking as usual.

The child may become very cold and shiver as their body temperature rises. They may also break out in a sweat.
You can take your child’s temperature with a thermometer

Use a thermometer that measures body temperature.

The most accurate result is obtained by taking the child’s temperature in the ear or rectum. Use the rectal method if the child is younger than one.

Let the child rest for half an hour before taking their temperature.

You can purchase a thermometer at the pharmacy. Ask the staff for advice.
How to take the temperature in the ear

Use a thermometer that measures body temperature in the ear.

Cover the thermometer probe without touching the probe. Gently pull the ear up and back. Insert the thermometer straight into the ear.

Press the button and wait until the thermometer beeps. Now you can see your child’s temperature.
How to take the temperature in the rectum

Put some ointment, baby oil or cooking oil on the thermometer.

Insert the thermometer into the rectum.

    For children younger than six months: only insert the tip of the thermometer.
    For children older than six months: insert 1–2 cm of the thermometer.

It is important that the child is lying still when you take their temperature, otherwise it may cause pain.

Clean the thermometer afterwards.

Here you can see an instructional video on how to take the temperature in the ear.
What you can do to help your child

    Encourage the child to be calm. However, it is not necessary that they lie down all the time.
    Keep the child company.
    Make sure that the child drinks more than usual.
    Give the child food and drink that they enjoy. It is okay if the child eats less than usual for a few days.
    Remove the child’s clothing or blankets if they get too warm. Open the window.
    Put more clothing on the child or cover them with a blanket if they start to get cold.

When and where should I seek medical care?

Fever is a common condition and most people do not need to seek medical care when they have a fever.

Contact a healthcare clinic if your child’s fever lasts for more than four days.

A healthcare clinic can also be referred to as, for example, a GP surgery, a family doctor practice, or a healthcare centre.
When urgent medical care is required

You should contact a healthcare clinic immediately if any of the following apply:

    The child has a temperature of 41°C or higher.
    The child has a fever and seems very ill.
    The child is younger than six months and has a fever.
    The child has visited a tropical country, and now has a fever along with a headache or body pain.

Some healthcare clinics are open during evenings and weekends.

Seek care at the emergency department if the healthcare centre is closed or unable to receive you.
Finding a healthcare clinic

Revision date:
2023-09-04
Editor:
Jenny Magnusson Österberg, 1177.se, National Editorial Team
Reviewer:
Inge Axelsson, Paediatrician, Professor Emeritus of Medical Science, Paediatric Clinic, Östersund Hospital

Retrived from: https://www.1177.se/en/other-languages/other-languages/symtomsjukdom---andra-sprak/feber-hos-barn--engelska/


Head lice

Does it feel itchy on your scalp, which is the skin close to your hair? It could be due to lice. Lice are only spread through direct hair-to-hair contact. If you have lice, you should treat it as soon as possible. You do this yourself at home.

What are lice?

Lice eggs may be visible in the hair.

A head louse is 2–3 millimetres long.


Head lice, sometimes just called lice, are small creatures that live in the hair, close to the scalp. They are small and therefore hard to see. Lice do not usually have a colour, but they may be grey, brown, black or red.

Lice suck blood and lay eggs that are small, round and white. Lice thrive where it is warm, such as in hair that is over 3 centimetres long.
How are lice spread?

Lice are spread between people by one person's hair coming into direct contact with another person's hair. It does not matter if you are clean or dirty. Anyone with hair on their head can get lice.

Lice cannot fly or jump, so there is no need to wash items like bedding, towels or toys. Lice can, however, be spread from hair through combs and brushes. So, these need to be cleaned.
How do I know if I have lice?

You can tell that you have lice because your hair will be itchy. It usually itches the most around your neck and on the sides of your head. If you look closely, you may be able to see the lice eggs.

You can also check your pillow. You might see a black powder there if you have lice.
Comb your hair with a lice comb

Comb your hair over a sheet of white paper.

The easiest way to check for head lice is to comb your hair with a lice comb. You can buy a lice comb at any pharmacy.

Follow these steps:

    Sit down at a table.
    Place a sheet of white paper in front of you.
    Carefully comb all of your hair over the paper.
    Check the paper to see if there are any lice.

Follow these steps when using a lice comb on someone else’s hair

It is usually easier to comb someone else's hair than to comb your own.

1. Starting from the back, comb the hair to the sides.

How do I get rid of lice?

You can get rid of lice by treating your head lice at home. Start by combing with a lice comb. Then treat your hair and scalp with a lice treatment product, which is available from any pharmacy. Repeat the treatment after seven days.

A lice treatment product can be used on anyone over the age of two. Please contact a healthcare centre before treating a child who is younger than two.

Everyone who lives in the same house must be treated at the same time. Avoid hair-to-hair contact until everyone’s hair has been treated for the second and final time. Otherwise, there is a risk that the lice will spread again.
If you have trouble combing your hair

If you have very curly or thick hair, it may be hard to run a comb all the way through it. In such cases, you can start off by putting conditioner in your hair and then combing a small area at a time using a regular comb or brush. After this, you can use the lice comb.
How do I avoid getting lice again?

Keep combing your hair thoroughly for two weeks after the treatment. Comb your hair at least twice a week.

Lice are most commonly spread during the summer. It is therefore important to use a lice comb and treat children who have live head lice before the autumn semester starts.

Even if you get rid of the lice, you can get lice again. If you learn that there is a case of lice at your children's preschool or school, comb both your own hair and your children's hair with a lice comb immediately. The earlier you find the lice, the easier it is to get rid of them.

Revision date:
2020-09-29
Editor:
Lovisa Dragstedt, 1177.se, National Editorial Team
Reviewer:
Bertil Marklund, professor in general medicine, Göteborg
Illustrator:
Lotta Persson, illustrator, Gothenburg
Photographer:
Kim Søholt Larsen Sjukhusfotografen på Skaraborgs sjukhus

Retrived from: https://www.1177.se/en/other-languages/other-languages/symtomsjukdom---andra-sprak/loss-i-haret--andra-sprak/

Bitten by a tick

Ticks are small insects that bite into the skin and suck blood. Remove any ticks that you find on your skin. Ticks can sometimes spread diseases. If you are bitten, you may need to seek medical care.

What are ticks?

A tick is 1–4 millimetres long.

Ticks are small insects that are found in nature between March and October. High grass is one example of where you might find ticks.

Ticks suck blood from people and animals. A tick looks like a small spider and is 1–4 millimetres long. A tick may grow bigger in size once it has sucked blood.
Ticks can spread diseases

Ticks are not dangerous, but they can spread diseases. One of these diseases is TBE, tick-borne encephalitis, which can cause inflammation, swelling, of the brain. Another disease is called Lyme disease, and this can affect the skin, joints, and nerves. You can get vaccinated against TBE, but not against Lyme disease.

There is a greater risk of infection if the tick stays attached to the skin for a long time. You should therefore remove the tick as quickly as possible.
How do I remove a tick?

    Use tweezers to remove ticks. Pharmacies offer different kinds that you can buy.
    Grasp the tick as close to the skin as possible. Gently pull it straight out. Try to get all of the tick out.
    Wash the area where the tick was attached with soap and water.

If any parts of the tick remain, you can try to remove them. Otherwise, they usually disappear on their own. The skin may get a little red and swollen around the bite for a few days, but then heal.
When should I seek medical care?
A rash on the skin
A red rash, which may look like a circle, could be Lyme disease.

Most people who are bitten by a tick do not need medical care.

Contact a healthcare centre if a week has passed and any of the following has happened:

    There is a red spot in the area where the tick was attached, and this spot is larger than a couple of centimetres. The spot can be completely red or look like a ring, and it may be lighter in the centre.
    You have a fever, headaches, aches in your body, and you are more tired than usual.

Some clinics are open in the evenings and on weekends.

Call the 1177 hotline if you would like advice about what to do. The hotline is staffed by nurses. They can help you with information on where to seek care, if necessary.
Tips for not getting bitten by a tick

    Wear a long-sleeved shirt, long trousers, and high shoes or boots whenever you are out in nature.
    Check your body for ticks after you have been out in nature.
    Check your skin when you get undressed or shower/take a bath.
    Check your children's skin after they have been out in nature.

Also check your dogs, cats or any other pets. Remove ticks as soon as possible.
Vaccination against TBE

There is a particular risk of ticks spreading the disease TBE in certain areas, such as:

    Uppland
    Stockholm County, near the sea
    Södermanland
    Västra Götaland County.

There are also other areas where the risk of infection is greater. Call the 1177 hotline if you are not sure about whether there is a greater risk in your area.

Get vaccinated if you plan to be out in nature in an area where there is a greater risk of infection.

You need to get vaccinated two months beforehand in order to be completely protected against TBE. Contact a healthcare centre or clinic to get vaccinated.

Revision date:
2020-03-20
Editor:
Lovisa Dragstedt, 1177.se, National Editorial Team
Reviewer:
Bertil Marklund, professor in general medicine, Göteborg

Retrived from: https://www.1177.se/en/other-languages/other-languages/symtomsjukdom---andra-sprak/

This is 1177
Det här är 1177 - engelska

You can call the 1177 helpline if you or someone in your family is ill. You can get advice from a nurse in English or Swedish. You can call any time of day. The website 1177.se provides information about health and illness.

Läs texten på svenska.

1177.se is the healthcare system’s dedicated website. It is also a telephone number.

You can read more about how healthcare works in Sweden in this text.
Call 1177 for advice on healthcare

Call the 1177 helpline if you need advice when you are ill or injured.

Your call will be answered by a nurse. You can choose to speak Swedish or English. In some regions, you can also get help in other languages.

The nurse can give you advice on how to manage your condition. If necessary, they can tell you where to go for care.
For the whole family

You can also call if a child or relative is ill. There is no charge for using the 1177 hotline. You will only be charged for the cost of the call.

Call 0046 771-11 77 00 if your phone does not have a Swedish subscription or SIM card, or if you are calling from another country.
Your information is protected

You need to provide your personal identity number or coordination number when you call 1177.  This is needed so that the staff can make notes. The notes are saved.

Your personal details and what you tell us are protected by confidentiality and professional secrecy. This means that staff are not allowed to tell anyone outside of healthcare anything about you. This secrecy applies to all healthcare staff you meet, including interpreters and pharmacy staff.
Advice on health and healthcare online

The website 1177.se provides information about illnesses, care and health. It also gives advice on what you can do to make you or your child feel better.

All the information on 1177.se has been fact-checked by doctors and other healthcare professionals.
Finding care

You can search for and find addresses and telephone numbers for different healthcare clinics.

Choose the region you live in to get the right information. You can do this at the top of the page.
Log in with e-identification

You can also log in to 1177.se.  Then you can, for example, make an appointment or contact a healthcare clinic. To log in, you need an e-identification program and a Swedish personal identity number.
Share article


Revision date:
2022-03-24
Editor:
Lovisa Dragstedt, 1177.se, National Editorial Team
Reviewer:
Martin Wohlin, Doctor and Medical Expert at 1177.se, Stockholm
Link: https://www.1177.se/en/other-languages/other-languages/soka-vard/det-har-ar-1177/


How to buy medicines in Sweden

You can buy some common medicines yourself from places such as a pharmacy or shop. However, there are some medicines that require a prescription. For these, you need to first contact a healthcare provider.

It is important that you know how to take your medicines. If you have any questions about your medicines, contact a healthcare professional. You can also ask at a pharmacy.

Läs texten på svenska här.
Different types of medicines

There are different types of medicines. Some medicines, called over-the-counter medicines, can be bought without a prescription. Examples of these include medicines for a cough, sore throat, aches or fever. This is called self-care. The other type of medicine is part of a treatment. For such medicines, you need a prescription.
When you are at the doctor’s

Before a doctor or other healthcare professional writes a prescription, you need to tell them what other medicines you are taking. This is important to make sure you get the right medicine at the right dose.

You can read more in the text: How healthcare works in Sweden.
Where do I buy medicines?

You can buy medicines in a pharmacy or a shop.
Buying at a pharmacy

At a pharmacy, you can buy both medicine for self-care and prescription medicine. Only pharmacies and their websites are allowed to sell prescription medicines.

When you shop on a pharmacy website, the medicines are sent to your home or to the pharmacy. Some pharmacies can also deliver medicines to you.

All pharmacy staff are sworn to secrecy. This means that the staff are not allowed to tell anyone else anything about you.

You must be at least 18 years old to buy certain medicines from a pharmacy.
Buying at a grocery store or petrol station

You can buy many self-care medicines at a grocery store or petrol station.

To buy medicines in a shop or at a petrol station, you must be at least 18 years old.
If you have any questions

All pharmacies have trained staff. They can answer questions about medicines.

You can also call Läkemedelsupplysningen (Medicines Information Line), which is open weekdays between 8:00 and 17:00. The phone number is 0771-46 70 10. They can speak both Swedish and English.
How much do prescription medicines cost?

If you live in Sweden, you are covered by what is known as high-cost protection. You only pay up to a certain amount each year for your prescription medicines. Children under 18 years of age do not usually have to pay for prescription medicines.

This also applies to children who are seeking asylum or who do not have a permit to be in Sweden.

Adults who are seeking asylum or who do not have a permit to be in Sweden have to pay a small fee for prescription medicines.
LMA card if you are an asylum seeker

When you seek asylum, you will receive a special card from the Swedish Migration Agency (Migrationsverket). This is called an LMA card. It applies to both adults and children. When you present the card, you can buy some prescription medicines at a lower price.
What should I do if I come from Ukraine?

Register with the Swedish Migration Agency if you are a refugee from Ukraine.
Present your UT card when you visit a pharmacy

When you register with the Swedish Migration Agency, you will receive a special card. This is called a UT card. It applies to both adults and children. When you present the card, you can buy some prescription medicines at a lower price.
If you are not registered with the Swedish Migration Agency

If you are not registered with the Swedish Migration Agency, you have to pay the full price for medicines.
Interpretation into your language

You can get help from an interpreter if you do not speak Swedish. When booking your healthcare appointment, let them know that you need an interpreter.

Revision date:
2022-10-17
Editor:
Ingela Andersson, 1177.se, National Editorial Team
Reviewer:
Olle Olsson, Administrator, Health and Social Care Department, Sveriges kommuner och regioner, StockholmAnna Åberg, National Adviser, Legal Division, Sveriges kommuner och Regioner, Stockholm

Link: https://www.1177.se/en/other-languages/other-languages/soka-vard/sa-koper-du-lakemedel-i-sverige-engelska/

Så fungerar vården i Sverige - engelska

If you or someone in your family needs medical care, you can usually get help at a healthcare centre (vårdcentral) . Call 1177 if you are unsure where to seek care. You can choose to speak Swedish or English. The nurse who answers the 1177 helpline can also give you advice on what you can do yourself to feel better.

Läs texten på svenska här.

Healthcare in Sweden is governed by different areas called regions. Choose a region at the top of the page to find out what applies where you live.

This text contains links to 1177.se , where you can search for healthcare clinics. The information is in Swedish. Ask someone who speaks Swedish for help if you need it. Read more about 1177 in this text.
There is a healthcare centre close to where you live

A healthcare centre is a clinic that is usually close to where you live. It may also be called a health centre (hälsocentral), a GP surgery (husläkarmottagning) or a doctor’s office (familjeläkarmottagning).

A healthcare centre is staffed by doctors, nurses, and other healthcare professionals. They can help if you or someone in your family is sick or depressed.
The healthcare centre is open on weekdays

The healthcare centre is always open during the day from Monday to Friday. Some healthcare centres may also be open at other times.

You usually need to make an appointment before you come.

You can search for a healthcare centre near you here. The page is in Swedish.
Urgent care centres during evenings and weekends

If you need to seek care when the healthcare centre is closed, you can turn to an urgent care centre. These are open evenings and weekends.

You can search for an urgent care centre here. The page is in Swedish.
An emergency department when you are seriously ill

If you are seriously injured or become very ill, seek care at an emergency department of a hospital. They are open 24 hours a day. You do not need to make an appointment beforehand.

In an emergency department, the sickest people get help first. This means that if you are not seriously ill, you may have to wait to receive care.
112 - Emergencies

Call 112 if the matter is very urgent, or if your or someone else’s life is in danger.

The person who answers can speak Swedish and English, but can get help from an interpreter if needed. An ambulance will be sent if you or someone who is ill needs urgent care at an emergency department.
Centres for children

There are special centres for children up to the age of six. These are called child health centres (barnavårdscentraler). A child may go there regularly, and will also receive their vaccinations there. You can search for a child health centre here. The page is in Swedish.

In some places, there are special hospitals and emergency departments for children.
Centres for young people

A youth guidance centre (ungdomsmottagning) is for young people between the ages of 13 and 25. There, you can get help with things like contraception, pregnancy tests, sexually transmitted diseases, counselling and advice.

Read more at youmo.se.

You can find a youth guidance centre here. The page is in Swedish.
Centres for women

There are special centres for women. These are called midwifery clinics (barnmorskemottagning), maternity centres (mödravårdscentral) or women’s clinics (kvinnohälsovård). At these centres, you can get advice, and help with contraception and testing for various diseases, for example. You can also come for check-ups if you are pregnant.

When you are due to give birth, you may go to a maternity ward. They are open 24 hours a day.

You can search for a midwifery clinic here. The page is in Swedish.
Other clinics

You may sometimes need care at another clinic, such as a dermatology clinic for your skin, a psychiatric clinic for mental health or an eye clinic for your eyes.

For such a visit, you may need what is known as a referral. A referral contains information about the examination or treatment you require. The healthcare professional you see at the healthcare centre can send the referral.

You may have to wait for some time for an appointment at one of these clinics.
Dental care centres

Dental care is often more expensive than other care. Ask about the cost before you visit. Children and young people usually get dental care for free.

You can find a dental care centre here. The page is in Swedish.
How much does healthcare cost?

The amount you pay when seeking healthcare in Sweden varies. For example, it costs more to seek care at an emergency department than at a healthcare centre.

The cost also varies depending on your age, and whether you live in Sweden or come from another country.

There is often no charge for children and young people.
Ask for an interpreter to get help in your language

You may be entitled to an interpreter if you do not speak Swedish. The interpreter is sworn to secrecy.

You will not have to pay for assistance by an interpreter. Contact your healthcare clinic before you go to get help in your language.
You have the right to feel safe when using healthcare services

All staff are sworn to secrecy. This means that staff are not allowed to tell anyone outside of healthcare anything about you. This secrecy applies to all healthcare staff you meet, including interpreters and pharmacy staff.

When you seek care, you need to say your name and who you are. If you have any documents that prove your identity, it is a good idea to take them with you.

The site youmo.se contains information on secrecy and confidentiality for young people. The text is available in several languages.

Revision date:
2022-03-24
Editor:
Lovisa Dragstedt, 1177.se, National Editorial Team
Reviewer:
Olle Olsson, Administrator, Health and Social Care Department, Sveriges kommuner och regioner, Stockholm

Link: https://www.1177.se/en/other-languages/other-languages/soka-vard/sa-fungerar-varden-i-sverige/

Vård i Sverige om du kommer från ett annat land - engelska

In Sweden, you always have the right to emergency care. This is true even if you come from another country and become ill while you are in Sweden. How much you will have to pay depends, among other things, on which country you are from. In some cases, you have to pay the full cost yourself.

If you are an asylum seeker or do not have a permit to be in Sweden, you can find more information here.

Läs texten på svenska här.
You always have the right to emergency care

You always have the right to receive care in urgent situations. In other words, emergency care that you need urgently, such as if you get a serious infection or if you break a bone and need to be fitted with a plaster cast.
Necessary care

Another type of care is called necessary care. This includes care for conditions such as a chronic disease that you have your whole life.

You have the right to necessary care if, for example, you are insured in a country that is part of the EU. Being insured in a country means that you are covered by that country's social insurance system.
How much does healthcare cost?

The cost of healthcare services depends on which country you are insured in. There are different rules for different countries.
The Nordic countries

If you are insured in a Nordic country, you pay the same amount for healthcare services as people insured in Sweden. The Nordic countries are:

    Denmark
    Finland
    Norway
    Faroe Islands
    Greenland
    Iceland.

You will need to show an ID card and provide your home address.
European Health Insurance Card = EU card

If you are insured in any of the following countries, you pay the same amount for healthcare services as people insured in Sweden:

    an EU country
    Liechtenstein
    Switzerland.

You will need to show a European Health Insurance Card. This may also be called an EU card.

You order the European Health Insurance Card, EHIC, from the country in which you are insured. Children must also have an EU card.
Apply for reimbursement of the money afterwards

You can also pay the full cost of the healthcare services yourself, and then apply for reimbursement of the money you have spent from your home country.
If you plan to seek medical treatment

When you travel to Sweden for planned treatment, different rules apply.
If you come from a Nordic country

If you are insured in a Nordic country, you need a special certificate. You will then pay the same fees as people insured in Sweden.

You can apply for the certificate from your country's equivalent to the Swedish Social Insurance Agency (Försäkringskassan).
Some people may need to apply for reimbursement of the money afterwards

If you are insured in an EU country, Norway, Iceland or Liechtenstein, you can apply for planned treatment in Sweden. In such case, you will pay for the treatment at the time it is provided, but can then apply for reimbursement of the money from your home country.

The rules for how much you can be reimbursed differ from country to country.
If you come from a country outside of the EU, EEA or Switzerland

Most people who come from a country outside of the EU, EEA or Switzerland will have to pay the full cost themselves if they need healthcare services in Sweden. This applies to emergency, necessary, and planned care. The EEA includes Norway, Iceland, and Liechtenstein.
Sweden has an agreement with some countries

Sweden has a special agreement with some countries regarding healthcare. Under this agreement, people from the countries in question pay the same amount for certain types of healthcare services as people insured in Sweden. This applies, for example, if you break a bone and need to be fitted with a plaster.

Countries with an agreement are:

    Australia
    Algeria
    Israel
    Turkey
    the state of Quebec in Canada.

Interpretation into your language

You can get help from an interpreter if you do not speak Swedish. Let the clinic know you need an interpreter when you book your appointment.

Revision date:
2022-08-26
Editor:
Katja Öster, 1177.se, National Editorial Team
Reviewer:
Labeata Shala, verksamhetsutvecklare internationell vård, Swedish Social Insurance Agency, Stockholm

Link: https://www.1177.se/en/other-languages/other-languages/soka-vard/vard-i-sverige-om-du-kommer-fran-ett-annat-land---engelska/

Text below is about: Care if you are an asylum seeker or do not have a permit to be in Sweden

Vård om du är asylsökande eller inte har tillstånd att vara i Sverige - engelska

If you are an adult asylum seeker, you have a right to receive medical and dental care that is deemed as urgent. This also applies if you are in Sweden without a permit. If you are under the age of 18, you always have the right to medical and dental care.
A nurse examining a patient
Regardless of nationality all adults are able to receive medical and dental care that is deemed as urgent.

Care that is deemed as urgent includes, for example, being fitted with a plaster cast if you break your leg.

How do I seek care?

If you or someone in your family needs medical care, you can usually get help at a healthcare centre (vårdcentral). It may also be called a health centre (hälsocentral), a GP surgery (husläkarmottagning) or a doctor’s office (familjeläkarmottagning).
If you are unsure where to seek care

You can always call 1177 if you are unsure where to seek care. You can choose to speak Swedish or English.

The nurse who answers the 1177 helpline can also give you advice on what you can do to make yourself feel better.

Read more about how healthcare works in Sweden.
LMA card if you are an asylum seeker

When you seek asylum, you will receive a special card from the Swedish Migration Agency (Migrationsverket). This is called an LMA card. You must present the card when you seek care.

Children also receive an LMA card when they seek asylum.
What should I do if I come from Ukraine?

Register with the Swedish Migration Agency if you are a refugee from Ukraine. You will then get the same medical and dental care as people seeking asylum.

You will also be offered a health check.
Present your UT card when you seek care

You will receive a special card when you register with the Swedish Migration Agency. This is called a UT card. You must present the card when you seek care. This applies to both children and adults.

Everyone over the age of 12 is offered free vaccination against COVID-19.
If you are not registered with the Swedish Migration Agency

If you are not registered with the Swedish Migration Agency, you can receive emergency care, but will have to pay for it yourself.
How much does healthcare cost?

There is no charge for healthcare for children up to the age of 18. This applies to both children seeking asylum and children who do not have a permit to be in Sweden. There may sometimes be a charge for children seeking care at an emergency department.
Adults pay for care

If you are aged 18 or older, you pay a fee for medical and dental care.
Examples of healthcare costs

    Visiting a doctor at a healthcare centre costs a maximum of SEK 50.
    Visiting a dentist costs SEK 50. This applies to dental care that is urgent.
    Prescription medicines cost a maximum of SEK 50. However, some medicines, such as cough medicines, cost the full price.

Examples of healthcare that is free of charge

    Visits to a midwifery clinic.
    Maternity care.
    Visits to a children's healthcare centre (BVC).

Free health check for adults and children

All adults and children seeking asylum in Sweden are offered a health check. This is free of charge.

If you are in Sweden without a permit, you will be offered a health check when you seek healthcare. You will not have to pay for this.
Ask for an interpreter to get help in your language

You may be entitled to an interpreter if you do not speak Swedish. The interpreter is sworn to secrecy. You will not have to pay for assistance by an interpreter. Contact your healthcare clinic to arrange help in your language before your visit.

Revision date:
2022-04-05
Editor:
Katja Öster, 1177.se, National Editorial Team
Reviewer:
Olle Olsson, Administrator, Health and Social Care Department, Sveriges kommuner och regioner, StockholmAnna Åberg, National Adviser, Legal Division, Sveriges kommuner och Regioner, Stockholm

Link:
https://www.1177.se/en/other-languages/other-languages/soka-vard/vard-om-du-ar-asylsokande/


Advice if you feel bad after experiencing something frightening

It is quite common to feel bad after something frightening has happened. For example, you may feel scared and have trouble sleeping. This usually goes away on its own after some time. There are things you can do to make yourself feel better.

If you are a young person, you can read more at Youmo.se.
It is common for the reaction to come later

It is quite common to have a reaction during and after something frightening has happened. Sometimes the reaction comes much later.

Here are some common examples of how you might feel:

    You have trouble sleeping or have nightmares.
    You think about what happened often, and the memories may feel real.
    You often feel sad or angry.
    You may suddenly feel very scared.
    You avoid people or places that remind you of what happened.

If you have been feeling this way a long time, it may seem like nothing makes you happy or that nothing matters.

What can I do to make myself feel better?

Talk to others about how you are feeling. You will often feel better afterwards. You can talk to someone you know or trust.

You can also talk to someone in a club, a religious community, or in healthcare.

Here are other things that may help you feel better:

    Get outside and move your body. Preferably during the day when it is light.

    Try to sleep and eat at the same times every day.
    Do things that make you happy or take your mind off things.

Avoid alcohol and drugs. It may feel like these help at first. But later, you feel worse.

Set a limit to how much time you spend reading or watching the news, or on social media. Avoid information that might make you more anxious.
What can I do to support a child?

Every child is different. They may react in different ways. There is no right or wrong way.

Here are some things to think about if a child has been through something frightening:

    Talk about what is happening and has happened in a way that the child understands.
    Listen to and answer the child's questions and concerns.
    Show that it is OK to worry. But also that it is OK to take breaks from worrying.
    Avoid news that might make the child more anxious. Talk instead about what you know.
    Ask what your child sees on the internet. Tell them that not everything that is spread is true. You do not have to watch everything that is shown.
    Let the child express themselves in ways other than words, such as drawing, writing or playing.
    Keep up daily routines, and try to find fun things to do together.

Safe place 

There are apps that your child can use on a mobile phone, computer or tablet to help them cope with worry, stress and anxiety. One example is the app Safe Place from Rädda Barnen. It is free to use and available in several languages.
You can download the app here. 
When and where should I seek help?

Most people who feel bad after a frightening experience do not need to seek help from healthcare services. But it is important to seek help if you or someone in your family does not start to feel better after two to four weeks.

In such case, contact one of these clinics:

    a healthcare centre (vårdcentral)
    a youth guidance centre (ungdomsmottagning)
    an urgent care centre
    a psychiatric clinic.

You can read more about how healthcare works in Sweden here.
Ask for advice


Call 1177 for help on what to do.

Call 0046 771-11 77 00 if your phone does not have a Swedish subscription or SIM card, or if you are calling from another country.

Your call will be answered by a nurse. You can choose to speak Swedish or English. Help is sometimes available in other languages.

If you are feeling very bad or have thoughts of not wanting to live, call 112 or go straight to an emergency department.

Revision date:
2022-04-08
Editor:
Lovisa Dragstedt, 1177.se, National Editorial Team
Reviewer:
Charlotte Therup Svedenlöf, Psychologist, Psychotherapist, Regionalt kunskapscentrum Kris- & katastrofpsykologi (Crisis and Disaster Psychology Unit),

This text is from: https://www.1177.se/en/other-languages/other-languages/psykisk-halsa---andra-sprak/rad-till-dig-som-mar-daligt-efter-skrammande-handelser---andra-sprak/

Common discomforts during pregnancy
Vanliga besvär under en graviditet - engelska

When you are pregnant, your body is affected in different ways. This may give rise to different discomforts, which will usually disappear after you give birth.

This text covers some of the most common discomforts.

Läs texten på svenska här.
Nausea is common

Many people have what is called morning sickness, which means they feel nauseous during pregnancy. Some vomit.
You may be very tired

Fatigue is common during pregnancy.

This fatigue may be due to anaemia, which is when you do not have enough healthy red blood cells. Your midwife will therefore check your blood count when you visit the midwifery clinic. You may need to take iron tablets if your blood count is too low.
You may have stomach pain

Your stomach may hurt for various reasons. The uterus is growing and the baby is moving. You may also be having Braxton Hicks contractions.
You may have pelvic and back pain

The ligaments in your body relax and stretch during pregnancy, which can put a strain on your joints. You may feel pain in your pelvic area and in your lower back.
You may catch a cold more easily

During pregnancy, your immune system becomes weaker. This may make it easier for you to catch a cold.
Your breasts may feel tender

Breasts grow early in pregnancy as they prepare to produce milk.

This may make your breasts feel sore and taut throughout your pregnancy.
Vaginal discharge

It is common to have more discharge when you are pregnant. Discharge is a fluid that comes out of your vagina.
You may have trouble sleeping

It is common to have trouble sleeping during pregnancy. For example, it may be hard to find a comfortable position in bed. Some people need to get up frequently to pee.
Leg cramps

Some people may wake up with cramps in their legs. This can cause a lot of pain for a short time. It is not a serious problem.

Standing up may help. You can also try massaging the muscle.
You may get a stuffy nose and nosebleeds

You have more fluid in your body during pregnancy. This makes your mucous membranes swollen, and may make it easier to bleed.

For example, you may get a nosebleed. A stuffy nose is also a common discomfort.
Sleep with your head elevated

Try sleeping with your head elevated if you have a stuffy nose.

You can also try using saline in your nose. This is available at any pharmacy.

Avoid using non-prescription nose drops for more than ten days.
Your legs and feet may become swollen

Legs and feet often become swollen during late pregnancy. Compression socks may help ease this.

Also try to keep your legs elevated.
Changes to your skin

Some people develop stretch marks, which look like little lines in the skin. They do not go away, but they may fade after pregnancy.
You may feel sad

Pregnancy may affect your mood. Some people get sad more easily than usual or feel sad all the time.

Talk to a midwife about how you are feeling.
You may feel dizzy

In early pregnancy, your blood pressure may drop. You may then feel dizzy.

Later in your pregnancy, your blood pressure will usually be back to normal.

Your midwife will check your blood pressure regularly.
Constipation

Constipation is common during pregnancy. This is because your intestines are working more slowly. Remember to drink water and keep active.
Examples of other common discomforts

Here are some additional discomforts that are common during pregnancy:

    back pain
    varicose veins
    haemorrhoids
    heartburn
    heart palpitations

    shortness of breath
    urinary tract infection.

When and where should I seek medical care? 

If you are worried or have questions, you can contact a midwifery clinic. 
If you need urgent care

If you have a lot of stomach pain, contact a healthcare provider immediately.

Contact one of these clinics:

    An emergency department if the condition occurs during the first half of your pregnancy.  
    A maternity ward if the condition occurs during the second half of your pregnancy.

Call 1177 for advice  

Call the 1177 helpline if you need advice on what to do. Your call will be answered by a nurse. The nurse can speak both Swedish and English. Help is sometimes available in other languages. Call 0046 771 11 77 00 if you are calling from a phone with a foreign number.
Get help from an interpreter

You can get help from an interpreter if you do not speak Swedish. Let the clinic know you need an interpreter when you book your appointment.


Revision date:
2022-09-12
Editor:
Rebecka Persson, 1177.se, National Editorial Team
Reviewer:
Anne-Charlotte Jonsson, Midwife, Maternity Care Unit, Stockholm


Abortion
Abort - engelska

An abortion is when a person chooses to end their pregnancy. It is the pregnant person's decision whether they want to have an abortion. This is called the right to choose abortion.

This right is described in a special law called the Abortion Act.

Läs texten på svenska här.
Make an appointment

Contact an abortion clinic if you are considering having an abortion.

The healthcare staff are sworn to secrecy. This means that they are not allowed to tell anyone about your visit.

At the abortion clinic, a midwife or doctor will examine you to determine how far along you are in the pregnancy.

Together, you will discuss which method of abortion is best for you. There are medical abortions and surgical abortions. Medical abortion is the most common method.

They will also help with contraception, if needed.
The medical abortion process

You go to the abortion clinic, where you are given a tablet that will induce abortion. You will then be sent home with some additional medicine.

One or two days after taking the first tablet, it is time to take the medicines you brought home with you. After a few hours, you will begin to bleed. It is common to see clots of blood as well. The pregnancy is expelled from the body along with the blood.

Some people may have to come back to the abortion clinic and finish the abortion there. This may happen, for example, if you have been pregnant for more than 10 weeks.
The surgical abortion process

A surgical abortion is a minor operation that is performed in a hospital.

First, you will be put to sleep with anaesthesia. The doctor will then insert a tube through the vagina up to the uterus to suction out the foetus.

Once you have woken up from the surgery, you will stay in the hospital for a while before going home.
When can I have an abortion?

You can have an abortion up to the 18th week of pregnancy.

The weeks of pregnancy are counted from the first day of your last period, i.e. they are not counted from the day of conception.
Abortion after week 18

It is possible to have an abortion after the 18th week of pregnancy. However, the National Board of Health and Welfare must give permission for the abortion. A counsellor at the abortion clinic will help you to apply for the abortion.
How you will feel after the abortion

After the abortion, it is a good idea to rest for a day or so.

It is common to bleed afterwards and feel some pain. At first, the bleeding will be similar to a period, or a little more. The bleeding will stop after a few weeks. How long the bleeding lasts varies from one person to another.

An abortion does not make it harder to get pregnant in the future. Nor does it put you at increased risk of a future miscarriage.
Counselling before and after an abortion

It may feel good to talk to someone. Both before and after having an abortion.

You can make an appointment for counselling at the abortion clinic.
When and where should I seek medical care?

There is a risk of getting an infection in your uterus after an abortion.

Seek medical care if any of the following applies to you:

    You develop a fever of over 38°C.
    You have pain in your abdomen.
    You have bad-smelling discharge.

Contact the abortion clinic that performed the abortion. If they cannot attend to you, seek care from an emergency department or a gynaecological emergency department.
Call 1177 for advice

Call the 1177 helpline if you need advice on what to do.
Your call will be answered by a nurse.
The nurse can speak both Swedish and English. Help is sometimes available in other languages.

Call +46 771-11 77 00 if you are calling from a phone with a foreign number.

Revision date:
2022-06-17
Editor:
Kristin Rohman, 1177.se, National Editorial Team 
Reviewer:
Johanna Katz-Dalsgaard, Midwife, Södertälje Hospital, Stockholm, Stockholm

Nausea during pregnancy
Att må illa under graviditeten - engelska

It is common to feel nauseous and vomit when you are pregnant. Many people call this morning sickness. Although unpleasant, it is not harmful to you or your baby. There are some things you can do to feel better.

Nausea is most common in early pregnancy. Most people stop feeling sick around week 20 of their pregnancy. Some people feel sick throughout their whole pregnancy.

Du kan läsa texten på svenska här.
How you may feel

Some people feel sick at certain times of the day. Others feel sick all the time. It is common for certain smells to make the nausea worse.

Some may feel so nauseous that they vomit.
Extreme nausea

Some people become very nauseous and vomit very often. In such cases, there is a risk of dehydration and not getting enough nutrients.

If you are feeling this poorly, you may need hospital care for periods of time.
When and where should I seek medical care?

Most people who feel nauseous during pregnancy do not need medical care. Talk to a midwife (barnmorska) if you have any questions or need advice.

Contact a healthcare provider if you cannot keep any food or drink down.

Contact one of these clinics:

    A midwifery clinic (barnmorskemottagning)
    A healthcare centre
    An out-of-hours service.

Get help from an interpreter

You can get help from an interpreter if you do not speak Swedish.

Let the clinic know you need an interpreter when you book your appointment.
Call 1177 for advice

Call the 1177 helpline if you need advice on what to do. Your call will be answered by a nurse. The nurse can speak both Swedish and English. Help is sometimes available in other languages. Call +46 771 11 77 00 if you are calling from a phone with a foreign number.
Self-help tips

Here are some tips that may help:

    Get some fresh air and exercise.
    Get rest.
    Avoid stress.
    Try to eat something as soon as you wake up.
    Eat often, but small portions at a time.
    Avoid foods that are fatty, spicy or fried.
    Try to drink tea or eat foods that contain some ginger.

If you vomit a lot, you will need to drink a little more than usual.
If you need support

Feeling nauseous and vomiting during pregnancy is often taxing. It may feel better to talk to someone about your symptoms. For example, you can talk to a midwife.
Treatment

There are medicines that can help. For example, some people feel better with medicine for motion sickness.

Talk to a doctor, midwife or pharmacist before using any medicine while pregnant.

Some people find that acupuncture helps.
Some people may need hospital treatment

If you are extremely nauseous and vomit a lot, you may need hospital treatment. You can then be given nutrition directly into your bloodstream by IV drip.
What causes nausea during pregnancy?

The nausea is caused by the hormones in your body when you are pregnant. Some people react to these hormones more than others.

The nausea may be worse when you are tired, stressed or have not eaten anything.

Nausea is particularly common if you are pregnant with more than one child.
It is not harmful

Feeling nauseous and vomiting are not harmful to you or your baby. The baby is getting the nutrients it needs.

Revision date:
2023-12-01
Editor:
Rebecka Persson, 1177.se, National Editorial Team
Reviewer:
Anne-Charlotte Jonsson, Midwife, Maternity Care Unit, Stockholm

Pain in your pelvic area during pregnancy
Att ha ont i bäckenet under graviditeten - engelska

When you are pregnant, the joints in your body become more flexible. You may experience pain in your pelvic area. This is common and usually goes away after childbirth.

Pain in your pelvic area during pregnancy is called pelvic girdle pain. This was previously called symphysis pubis dysfunction.

Läs texten på svenska här.
Where does it usually hurt?

It is common to have pain in the following places:

    The lower back.
    The buttocks.
    The hips.
    The pubic bone.
    The back of the thighs.
    The groin.

When does it hurt?

It may hurt so much that you find it difficult to move around as usual.

Some people have pain almost all the time. Others have pain only sometimes.

It is common for it to hurt more later in the day than in the morning.
When and where should I seek medical care?

Seek medical care if you are pregnant and have pain in your back or pelvis.

You can contact a midwife (barnmorska) or a physiotherapist.

See a physiotherapist if you have pain three months after giving birth.
Call 1177 for advice

Call 1177 for help on what to do. Your call will be answered by a nurse. If needed, they can tell you where to go for treatment.

The nurses speak Swedish and English. Help is sometimes available in other languages.

Call 0046 771-11 77 00 if you are calling from a phone with a foreign number.
Get help from an interpreter

You can get help from an interpreter if you do not speak Swedish.
Let the clinic know you need an interpreter when you book your appointment.
Everyday tips to reduce pain

Here are some tips you can try:

    Alternate between standing, sitting and walking.
    Take shorter steps than usual when walking.
    Take several shorter walks instead of one long walk.
    Take a lift, if available.
    Wear comfortable shoes.
    Support the lumbar area of your back with a pillow when sitting.
    Place a pillow between your knees when lying on your side.
    Put something warm on the area that hurts, such as a heating pad.

Avoid the following:

    Pushing a heavy pram or shopping trolley.
    Sitting cross-legged.
    Lifting heavy things.
    Walking up and down stairs.
    Bending down too often.

It is a good idea to exercise your muscles

It is a good idea to exercise both your back and your abdominal muscles. These muscles can support the pelvis.

A physiotherapist can advise you.
Treatment
Ett bäckenbälte som sitter under magen på en gravid person.
A pregnancy support belt can provide some relief.

You can get help from a midwife or physiotherapist. Here are some examples:

    You can buy or rent a pregnancy support belt.
    You can rent a so-called TENS machine. This can relieve pain using a weak electrical impulse.
    You can get acupuncture.

What causes pelvic girdle pain?

The joints in your body become more flexible when you are pregnant. This is due to hormones.

As a result of this, your pelvis may become less stable. You may then experience pain.
If you get pregnant again

Pelvic girdle pain will often come back during a new pregnancy.

If you are planning to become pregnant again, you can prepare your body by doing certain exercises. You can get advice from a physiotherapist.

Revision date:
2022-06-03
Editor:
Rebecka Persson, 1177.se, National Editorial Team
Reviewer:
Anne-Charlotte Jonsson, Midwife, Maternity Care Unit, Stockholm

Pre-eclampsia
Havandeskapsförgiftning - engelska

Pre-eclampsia is a condition you can get when you are pregnant. It is characterised by high blood pressure. It can affect both you and your baby. You may require rest and medicine to lower your blood pressure.

Du kan läsa texten på svenska här.

Pre-eclampsia is sometimes called pregnancy-induced hypertension and toxaemia.
Symptoms

Many people do not notice any symptoms of the condition. It is the midwife who detects it during a check-up.
When and where should I seek medical care?

When you are pregnant, you will visit the midwifery clinic (barnmorskemottagningen) several times.
If you develop pre-eclampsia, you will need to come in for extra check-ups.
If you need urgent care

People who develop the condition usually have it towards the end of their pregnancy – usually during the last six weeks. But it can develop earlier than this.

You may need medical attention more urgently if any of the following apply:

    You suddenly get a headache that does not feel normal.
    You have problems with your eyesight.
    You have a lot of pain in the upper part of your stomach, especially on the right side under your ribs.
    You feel nauseated and vomit during the second half of your pregnancy.
    Your face, hands or feet swell up. The swelling comes on suddenly.

    You feel generally unwell.

Contact one of these clinics:

    A midwifery clinic.
    An out-of-hours service.

If it is closed or they cannot attend to you, seek care from one of these clinics:

    An emergency department if the condition occurs during the first half of your pregnancy.
    A maternity ward if the condition occurs during the second half of your pregnancy.

Call 1177 for advice

Call the 1177 helpline if you need advice on what to do.

Your call will be answered by a nurse. The nurse can speak both Swedish and English.
Help is sometimes available in other languages.

Call +46 771 11 77 00 if you are calling from a phone with a foreign number.
Self-help tips

If you have pre-eclampsia, it is important to rest and take it easy.
Examinations

A midwife will measure your blood pressure when you visit the midwifery clinic.

You will be asked to provide a urine sample.

You may also be examined by ultrasound. This examination can show images of the baby in your womb.

You may also be examined using a device that measures your baby’s heart rate. This is called a CTG.
You can get help from an interpreter

You can get help from an interpreter if you do not speak Swedish.
Let the clinic know you need an interpreter when you book your appointment.
Treatments

Some people may be given a medicine called blood thinner early in the pregnancy. This may be done, for example, if you had pre-eclampsia in a previous pregnancy. The medicine may prevent you from developing the condition again.

If you have developed pre-eclampsia, you may be given medicine to lower your blood pressure.

Some people are hospitalised. This makes it easier for healthcare workers to monitor your blood pressure and how you are feeling.

If rest and treatment are not sufficient, the baby may need to be delivered early.
After the baby is born

Pre-eclampsia will go away after the baby is born.
Some people need to take medicines for a few months after giving birth.

You may be more likely to develop certain diseases later in life.
For example, you may be more likely to develop diseases of the heart and blood vessels, called cardiovascular diseases.
That is why it is a good idea to maintain a healthy lifestyle, as then you are less likely to get sick.

Revision date:
2022-05-04
Editor:
Kristin Rohman, 1177.se, National Editorial Team 
Reviewer:
Caroline Lilliecreutz, Gynaecologist and Obstetrician, Universitetssjukhuset, Linköping

Braxton Hicks contractions and labour contractions
Sammandragningar och värkar - engelska

The uterus is a muscle. Sometimes during pregnancy, the uterus will tighten and then relax. These are called Braxton Hicks contractions, or false labour. The uterus also tightens and relaxes when it is time to give birth. These contractions are called labour.

Du kan läsa texten på svenska här.
What Braxton Hicks contractions feel like

When you have a contraction, your stomach gets hard. It may feel uncomfortable. But it usually does not hurt.

Braxton Hicks contractions usually come at irregular intervals. They may come as you move or exert yourself, such as walking fast or lifting something.
It is common to have Braxton Hicks contractions

Braxton Hicks contractions often go away when you rest or relax.

It is common to have Braxton Hicks contractions from midway through your pregnancy until it is time to give birth.
How labour contractions feel

When the body starts to get ready for childbirth, you will have labour contractions.

Labour contractions usually hurt more. They come at regular intervals.

Labour contractions get stronger and more severe as labour progresses.
You may feel pressure in your lower abdomen. You may also feel pain in your back.
When it is time to go to the maternity ward

When the labour contractions are about two to three minutes apart, it is usually time to go to the maternity ward at the hospital.

You can go there earlier than this if you feel you need help. Always call the maternity ward of the hospital before going there.

Read more here about when it is time to go to the hospital maternity ward.
When and where should I seek medical care?

You do not need to seek medical care if you are having Braxton Hicks contractions.

It may be difficult to tell the difference between Braxton Hicks contractions and labour contractions. Contact a midwife (barnmorska) at the midwifery clinic if you are worried or uncertain.
Get help from an interpreter

You can get help from an interpreter if you do not speak Swedish.  Let the clinic know you need an interpreter when you book your appointment.
If urgent care is needed

You may need medical attention more urgently if any of the following apply:

    You are having Braxton Hicks contractions, and blood or amniotic fluid is coming from your vagina at the same time. This may mean you have gone into labour.

Contact one of these clinics:

    An emergency department if it occurs during the first half of your pregnancy.
    A maternity ward if it occurs during the second half of your pregnancy.

Call 1177 for advice

Call 1177 for help on what to do.

Your call will be answered by a nurse. The nurse can speak both Swedish and English.
Help is sometimes available in other languages.

Call +46 771 11 77 00 if you are calling from a phone with a foreign number.
Examinations

If you are having Braxton Hicks or labour contractions, the midwife may need to examine you by ultrasound.

They may also perform a urine test.
Treatment

You may need medicine if you are having labour contractions before it is time to give birth.

You do not need to do anything special when you feel Braxton Hicks contractions. But the following may provide some relief:

    You can take a hot bath or shower. 
    You can rest and relax.
    A simple massage may help you to relax.
    You can try different body positions.

The same things may help and relieve pain when you are in labour.
You can read more here about pain relief during childbirth.

Revision date:
2022-04-22
Editor:
Kristin Rohman, 1177.se, National Editorial Team 
Reviewer:
Anne-Charlotte Jonsson, Midwife, Maternity Care Unit, Stockholm

Alcohol and pregnancy
Alkohol och graviditet - engelska

Do not drink alcohol when you are pregnant. Alcohol contains substances that could harm the baby in the womb. If you find it difficult to stop drinking alcohol, you can get help.

You should also avoid alcohol if you are trying to get pregnant.
Alcohol can make it harder to get pregnant.

Du kan läsa texten på svenska här.
Self-help tips

It may feel strange not to drink alcohol if you usually do.
But it is often easier to change habits than you think.

If you have an alcohol addiction, it may be difficult to stop drinking.
But it is possible to stop. The most important thing is that you want to.

It may make it easier to stop if you keep reminding yourself that you want your baby to be as healthy as possible. Pregnancy may also curb your craving for alcohol.
What happens in your body?

Alcohol contains harmful substances.

When you drink alcohol, these harmful substances enter your bloodstream.
Your blood passes into the placenta. From the placenta, the harmful substances enter the baby’s body.

The harmful substances also enter the amniotic fluid that the baby drinks.

The more alcohol you drink and the more often you drink it, the greater the risk of harm to the baby.
The impact of alcohol

Here is what could happen if you drink alcohol when you are pregnant:

    The risk of miscarriage or death of the baby in the womb may increase.
    The baby does not grow properly. As a result, the baby may be smaller than it should be.
    The baby’s brain may be damaged. This may affect the baby’s development and behaviour.

If a baby is harmed by alcohol, it is called foetal alcohol syndrome (FAS).
As good as possible

You may feel bad if you have drunk alcohol while pregnant.
It is common to feel some shame and guilt.

But the most important thing is not to expose your baby to more alcohol.
Think about how to make things as good as possible from now on.
When and where should I seek treatment?

Seek treatment if you need help to stop drinking alcohol.
You can contact one of these clinics:

    A midwifery clinic (barnmorskemottagning).
    A healthcare centre (vårdcentral).

Get help from an interpreter

You can get help from an interpreter if you do not speak Swedish. Let the clinic know you need an interpreter when you book your appointment.
Call 1177 for advice

Call 1177 for help on what to do.

Your call will be answered by a nurse. The nurse can speak both Swedish and English. Help is sometimes available in other languages.

Call +46 771 11 77 00 if you are calling from a phone with a foreign number.
Treatment

If you find it difficult to stop drinking alcohol, you can get treatment.

There are several types of treatment.
Counselling is a common form of treatment that may help.

Revision date:
2022-04-19
Editor:
Kristin Rohman, 1177.se, National Editorial Team 
Reviewer:
Caroline Lilliecreutz, Gynaecologist and Obstetrician, Universitetssjukhuset, Linköping

Tobacco and pregnancy
Tobak och graviditet - engelska

It is harmful to use tobacco when you are pregnant. The harmful substances found in tobacco will travel to the baby in your womb. You should therefore avoid using tobacco when you are pregnant. If you find it difficult to stop, you can get help. Tobacco is found in products such as cigarettes.

You should also avoid tobacco if you are trying to get pregnant.
Tobacco can make it harder to get pregnant.

Du kan läsa texten på svenska här.
Self-help tips

Anyone can stop using tobacco. The most important thing is that you want to stop.
Remember that cravings for tobacco usually only last a few minutes.

It is often easier to stop during pregnancy. You may be motivated by wanting your baby to be as healthy as possible.

Pregnancy may also curb your craving for tobacco.
Different kinds of tobacco products

Examples of tobacco products include cigarettes, hookah, e-cigarettes and snus, which you put under your lip. All of these contain harmful substances, such as nicotine.

E-cigarettes are available without nicotine. But there are other substances in e-cigarettes that can be harmful. That is why you should also avoid e-cigarettes during pregnancy.
What happens in your body?

Tobacco contains harmful substances.

When you use tobacco, these harmful substances enter your bloodstream. Your blood passes into the placenta. From the placenta, the harmful substances enter the baby’s body.
The impact of tobacco

Here is what could happen if you use tobacco when you are pregnant:

    The risk of miscarriage may increase.
    The baby may not grow properly.
    The placenta may detach prematurely.
    Labour may start prematurely.

Tobacco can increase the risk of the baby dying in the womb or in the first six months after birth.
Think of the future

You may feel bad if you have used tobacco while pregnant. It is common to feel some shame and guilt.

The most important thing is not to expose your baby to more tobacco. Think about how to make things as good as possible from now on.
When and where should I seek treatment?

Seek treatment if you need help to stop using tobacco.

You can contact one of these clinics:
• A midwifery clinic (barnmorskemottagning).
• A healthcare centre (vårdcentral).
Get help from an interpreter

You can get help from an interpreter if you do not speak Swedish. Let the clinic know you need an interpreter when you book your appointment.
Call 1177 for advice

Call 1177 for help on what to do.
Your call will be answered by a nurse. The nurse can speak both Swedish and English. Help is sometimes available in other languages.
Call +46 771 11 77 00 if you are calling from a phone with a foreign number.
Treatment

Nicotine gum or patches are available. They reduce the craving for tobacco. But such medicines are harmful to the baby.

Talk to a doctor if you need to use medicines with nicotine when you are pregnant or breastfeeding.

Revision date:
2022-04-19
Editor:
Kristin Rohman, 1177.se, National Editorial Team 
Reviewer:
Caroline Lilliecreutz, Gynaecologist and Obstetrician, Universitetssjukhuset, Linköping

Visiting the midwifery clinic (barnmorske-mottagningen)
Besök på barnmorskemottagningen - engelska

When you are pregnant, you may visit a midwifery clinic. These visits are to see how you and the baby in your womb are doing. You will be given advice and help to prepare for the birth of your child. The visits are free of charge.

Du kan läsa texten på svenska här.

Contact a midwifery clinic as soon as you know you are pregnant.

You can find midwifery clinics here. The page is in Swedish.
What happens at the visits?

At the midwifery clinic, you will meet a midwife (barnmorska). Here are some examples of what you may talk about:

    How you are feeling.
    Whether you have been pregnant before.
    If you have or previously had any illnesses.
    Your thoughts about the pregnancy.

    Good foods to eat when you are pregnant.
    How you can move your body and exercise during the pregnancy.
    How tobacco, alcohol, drugs and medicines can affect your baby.
    Your thoughts about giving birth to your baby and breastfeeding.

You will also learn about different tests that provide information about the development of the foetus in the womb. These tests are called foetal diagnostics.

You will also undergo examinations and provide samples.
The staff are sworn to secrecy

Everyone who works in healthcare is sworn to secrecy. No staff member is allowed to tell anyone else about your visits to the midwifery clinic.
How often do visits take place?

You usually visit the midwife about six to ten times during your pregnancy. The number of times you need to go varies.

Towards the end of your pregnancy, the visits will become more frequent.
Tests and checks

During the visits, the midwife will perform tests and examinations. These are done to find out how both you and your baby are doing.

It is common for the midwife to perform tests on your blood and urine.

Other things the midwife will usually check:

    Your blood pressure.

    How much you weigh.
    How your uterus is growing.
    How the baby is moving.
    Your baby's heartbeat.

Information about you is collected in a medical record

The midwife writes important things about your pregnancy in a digital medical record. The staff at the maternity ward will read your medical record when you are in labour.
Meetings for parents

The midwifery clinic organises meetings for expectant parents. At these, you meet others who are also going to be parents.

At the meetings, you are given information and advice. Common topics include giving birth, pain relief that can be given during labour, the newborn baby, and breastfeeding.
You can get extra support

If you are worried or scared about giving birth, you can get extra support.
Let the midwife know if there are things you are worried about. It can be anything.
Some people need to go to specialist prenatal care (specialistmödravården)

If you have a certain illness or condition, you may need to go to something called specialist prenatal care.

The midwife or doctor at the midwifery clinic will tell you if you need this special care.
Get help from an interpreter

If you do not speak Swedish, you can get help from an interpreter during your healthcare visits. Let the clinic know you need an interpreter when you book your appointment.
Return visit to the midwifery clinic

After giving birth, you will need to go for a return visit to the midwifery clinic. The return visit will take place after 2 to 16 weeks.

At the return visit, you will talk about the delivery and about breastfeeding.

The midwife will perform a gynaecological examination. The midwife will also talk about using protection against another pregnancy.

You may have several return visits.

Revision date:
2022-04-08
Editor:
Kristin Rohman, 1177.se, National Editorial Team 
Reviewer:
Anne-Charlotte Jonsson, Midwife, Maternity Care Unit, Stockholm

Pregnant or recently given birth? Make your voice heard
Gravid eller nyss fött barn? Gör din röst hörd - engelska

If you are pregnant or have recently given birth, you now have the chance to participate in Graviditetsenkäten (the Pregnancy Survey). You will be asked questions about how you felt about the care you received during your pregnancy, after giving birth, and one year after giving birth. The survey also includes questions about your health. Each pregnancy and childbirth experience is unique, so your participation is important to us. Your feedback will help us improve the care.

Log in and enter your contact details to participate. Each part of the survey takes about five minutes to answer.

Läs texten på svenska här.
Who can take part in the survey?

The survey is divided into three sessions. You answer one section at a time. You will receive an email in your inbox here at the 1177.se website if any of the following applies to you:

    You are in week 25 of pregnancy.
    You gave birth eight weeks ago.
    You gave birth a year ago.

The email contains a clickable link to the relevant section of the survey. You’re free to complete all sections, but you don’t have to. If you are 25 weeks pregnant, you will receive all sections, and you can fill in one section or more.

To receive the survey, you must first log in and enter your contact details.
How do I take the survey?

    Log in to 1177.se.
    Go to settings and enter your email address or mobile phone number.
    Choose whether you want to be contacted by email or text message.
    Tick the “aviseringar” (notification) box, and you will receive a notice when the survey has been sent to you.

Once you have received the survey, you have six weeks to complete it.
What kind of questions are asked in the survey?

You will be asked questions about your experiences of and opinions about the care you received. For example, you may be asked questions about how you were treated by the midwife and other staff.

You will also be asked questions about your health, such as how you have been feeling during your pregnancy, or how you felt after giving birth.
Why is this survey being done?

The purpose of this survey is to give your region information to help develop and improve healthcare. The regions would like to improve care before, during and after childbirth.
Who formulated the questions in the survey?

The questions in the survey were formulated by Sveriges Kommuner och Regioner, SKR, in collaboration with Bristningsregistret, Graviditetsregistret, Svenska Barnmorskeförbundet, and SFOG – Svensk förening för obstetrik och gynekologi.

Participation in this survey is voluntary, and so is registering with Graviditetsregistret (the Swedish Pregnancy Register). Your responses will not be linked to you personally. Healthcare professionals can’t see if you have taken the survey, and they can’t access your responses.

The results will be presented at a group level once enough people have responded. According to law, personal data, like your name and your personal identity number, must always be anonymised before the results can be disclosed or used in reports or for research purposes.
Who can answer questions about the pregnancy survey?

Please contact a midwife if you have any questions about how to answer the survey. Are you experiencing any problems, or do you need support during your pregnancy or after giving birth? Please contact a midwife or health centre.

Revision date:
2023-11-10
Editor:
Jenny Andersson, 1177.se, National Editorial Team 
Reviewer:
Malin Vallentin Harman, Kommunikatör, Sveriges kommuner och regioner, SKR, Stockholm

Information can be found at: https://www.1177.se/en/other-languages/other-languages/graviditet---andra-sprak/
Retrived from: https://www.1177.se/en/other-languages/other-languages/graviditet---andra-sprak/

Telephone services
Telephone services ( covid-19) - engelska
If you have general questions about covid-19

Call telephone number 113 13. You are offered to speak through an interpreter if needed. The telephone line is staffed 24 hours a day and is operated on commission by the Swedish government.
If you or someone else gets ill and you need to talk to a nurse

Call telephone number 1177 if you or someone else gets ill and you need to talk to a nurse for advice on what to do or where to go for help. The nurses speak Swedish and English. Sometimes help in other languages might be available.
If you are calling from another country or if you have a phone with a foreign number

Call +46 771-11 77 00
If a person’s life is in danger

Call telephone number 112 if a person’s life is in danger and you need help straight away. You are offered to speak through an interpreter if needed.
Revision date:
2020-12-14
Editor:
Ida Friedmann, 1177.se, National Editorial Team

Examinations of your newborn baby
Undersökningar av det nyfödda barnet - engelska

A newborn baby is examined in a number of different ways during its first few days of life. Most of the examinations are done in hospital before you go home. You may need to come back for examinations if you have gone home early.

The timing of some of the examinations may vary. It depends, for example, on how you and your baby are doing.

Läs texten på svenska här.
Immediately after birth

Your baby will be examined several times immediately after birth.

Among other things, the staff will listen to your baby’s heartbeat and their breathing.

Your baby will receive treatment if necessary.

The baby can usually be held by a parent during this time. Sometimes the baby will need to be examined on a special table.
A midwife will examine your baby

A midwife will examine your baby a few hours after birth. The examination will include the following:

    The baby will be weighed and measured.
    The baby’s body temperature will be measured.
    A special substance in the blood will be measured. The midwife measures this using a meter on the skin. Sometimes a blood test is needed. If the value is high, the baby may need treatment.
    The baby will be given a shot of vitamin K in their thigh.

Sometimes blood sugar is measured.
A paediatrician will examine your baby

All babies are examined by a paediatrician before they go home. The examination is quick.

The paediatrician looks at and listens to the following:

    the heart
    the lungs and breathing
    the stomach
    the eyes
    the head
    the genitals and rectum
    the skin.

If you gave birth at home

A paediatrician should examine your baby as soon as possible after birth.

Talk to a midwife before the birth to plan an appointment.
PKU test

After two days, a blood test called a PKU test is performed. A blood sample for the test is taken from a blood vessel in the baby’s hand or foot.

The test is performed to check whether the baby has any unusual diseases.

It is good for the baby to have nursed shortly before the sample is taken, because the baby will then be calm and it will hurt less. Sometimes the baby may have sugar water in their mouth while the sample is taken.
Examination of your baby’s hearing
Nyfödd som gör hörseltest. Fotografi.
Förstora bilden
The hearing test is usually done while the baby is sleeping.

The midwife will examine your baby’s hearing. The examination is usually done while the baby is sleeping.
POX screening
Nyfödd som gör POX-screening med en klämma på foten. Fotografi.
Förstora bilden
This examination is done to check whether your baby has a congenital heart defect.

During the POX screening, a device is connected to your baby’s hand or foot. It is held in place with a clip or adhesive tape.

The examination is done to check whether your baby has a congenital heart defect.

It is quick and painless.
Your baby’s first pee and poo

The hospital staff will check whether your baby has peed and pooped before you go home.

Here you can see pictures of how a baby’s pee and poo change colour in the first week. The text is in Swedish.
The children’s health centre takes over

After you have come home from hospital, you will have your first contact with the children’s health centre (BVC). A BVC nurse will then make a home visit.
Get help from an interpreter

You may be entitled to an interpreter if you do not speak Swedish.

Revision date:
2022-10-27
Editor:
Jenny Magnusson Österberg, 1177.se, National Editorial Team
Reviewer:
Pontus Johansson, barnläkare, specialist på sjukdomar hos nyfödda, Lillugglans BVC, Göteborg, Göteborg
Photographer:
Jenny Hallström, 1177.se, National Editorial Team

Breastfeeding
Amning - engelska

Breastfeeding gives your baby food, closeness and security. But it can take time to get breastfeeding to work smoothly. Help is available.

How to get a good breastfeeding attachment

Läs texten på svenska här.
Breast milk can protect against disease

Breast milk protects your baby against certain diseases.
Breastfeeding can also reduce the risk of sudden infant death syndrome.
Baby formula can be a substitute for breast milk

Some people cannot or do not want to breastfeed. In such case, the baby can be given baby formula.

This is made to resemble breast milk as closely as possible.
Until what age should a baby breastfeed?

For the first six months, your baby should be given only breast milk or formula.

After six months, you can start giving your baby small amounts of food. Continue feeding them with breast milk or formula in parallel to this until your baby is at least one year old.
Starting to nurse a newborn baby

When your baby is a newborn, it is a good idea to hold them skin-to-skin.

Your baby may start to search for the breast on their own. Some babies may need a little help.

The first milk that comes is called colostrum. It is especially rich in nutrients.
It may take time to get started breastfeeding

It can sometimes take a few days for breastfeeding to get started. It may also take some time for the baby to learn to suckle in a way that works well.
The baby needs to latch on well

The baby needs to open their mouth wide and latch on to both the nipple and areola. The areola is the area around the nipple. This allows the baby to get enough milk. It also reduces the risk of you developing problems when breastfeeding.

How to tell when your baby has latched on well:

    Your baby needs to have as much of the areola as possible in their mouth.
    Your nipple looks the same after your baby has suckled.
    Your baby's lips are spread wide.

You may need to hand-express milk

If you are having trouble getting started with breastfeeding, you may need to hand-express milk or use a breast pump. Your baby may also need baby formula.
The staff at the BB ward (maternity ward) can show you how to hand-express milk or use a breast pump.
You can give your baby breast milk or formula with a spoon, cup or mug.
How do I know if my baby is getting enough?

Most babies show when they are satisfied and do not want any more.

Here is how you can tell whether your baby is getting enough breast milk:

    Your baby is alert.
    Your baby wakes up on their own and wants to suckle the breast.
    Your baby seems happy after nursing.
    Your baby gains weight. Your baby's weight will be checked at the children's health centre (BVC).
    Your baby pees so much that you have to change their nappy at least six times a day.
    Your baby's poo changes colour from black to yellow during the first week.

Advice and support

It may take some time to get started with breastfeeding and make it work smoothly. When this happens, it is good to have support, both from loved ones and healthcare professionals.

In the first week after the baby is born, you can contact BB.
After this, you can contact one of the following clinics:

    BVC
    a midwifery clinic (barnmorskemottagning)
    a lactation support clinic, if one is available where you live.

Get help from an interpreter

You can get help from an interpreter if you do not speak Swedish.
Call 1177 for advice

Call the 1177 helpline if you need advice on what to do. Your call will be answered by a nurse. The nurse can speak both Swedish and English. Help is sometimes available in other languages. Call +46 771 11 77 00 if you are calling from a phone with a foreign number.

Revision date:
2022-08-29
Editor:
Rebecka Persson, 1177.se, National Editorial Team
Reviewer:
Birgitta Kårén, Midwife, Paediatric Nurse, School Nurse, Stockholm
Filmproducent, produktionsår 2022:
Studio Kupol

Common breastfeeding problems
Vanliga besvär vid amning - engelska

It is common to experience breast discomfort when you first start breastfeeding. This will often pass after a while. Sometimes treatment is needed.

You can get help with breastfeeding. During the first week after giving birth, you can contact the maternity ward, also called the BB ward.

You can also contact the children's health centre (BVC) or a midwifery clinic. Some places have special lactation support clinics.

Läs texten på svenska här.
Your breasts are taut and leaky

It is common for breasts to be taut or leaky, especially when your milk first comes in.
You may also produce more milk than your baby is able to take in.
Apply pressure to the nipple

You can apply pressure to the nipple to stop the flow of milk. There are also so-called milk catchers or nursing pads that you can put in your bra.

If you have too much milk, you can hand-express some milk before feeding your baby. Take a break once in a while and let the milk drain out on its own.
Engorgement

When your milk first comes in, your breasts may feel very firm and taut. This usually occurs three to four days after you have given birth. Your body temperature may also be higher than normal.

This is called engorgement, and it usually goes away after a few days.
How to find relief

The best way is to let your baby nurse often.

It may feel nice to put something warm or cold on your breasts.
Latching pain

It is common to feel sore when you first start breastfeeding. Your nipples are sensitive and not used to nursing yet. This usually passes.

It can also hurt if your baby has a shallow latch, meaning that they do not have their mouth open wide enough when nursing.
Here is a video showing how to help your baby get a deep latch.
Painkillers

You can use non-prescription medicines with paracetamol or ibuprofen if you are in pain.
Sore nipples

Blisters, sores or cracks can form on your nipples.
Important to keep clean and dry

Wash your hands before breastfeeding. It is important to keep the area clean if sores develop. You could develop an infection if bacteria get into the sores.

Avoid using soap and lotions on your breasts. You can massage breast milk into your nipples before and after nursing. You can also clean your breasts with saline solution.
Allow your nipples to rest

You may need to give your nipples a break from breastfeeding to let them heal. In such case, you can hand-express milk or use a breast pump.

You can also use an aid called a nipple shield, which is a flexible silicone teat that protects the nipple.
Thrush (yeast infection)

Cracked and sore nipples can also be caused by a yeast infection called thrush.

Thrush can clear up on its own. If not, you may need to use a special ointment.

It is also important to keep your breasts dry if you have thrush.
Breast abscess

There is a risk of developing a breast abscess if you have a breast infection. A breast abscess can be very painful. You may also have a fever.

A breast abscess needs to be treated by a doctor.
Blocked milk ducts

If your breasts remain overly full for a length of time, one or more of the milk ducts in your breast may become blocked. When this happens, the milk cannot come out.

Common symptoms:

    You have a lump under your skin.
    An area of your breast feels warm and tender.
    You have a fever.
    It hurts when you breastfeed.

Try to get the milk out

It is best if your baby continues to suckle the affected breast. This will help the milk come out.

You can also try to hand-express milk or use a breast pump.

While breastfeeding, pumping or hand-expressing, massage your breast starting at the hard area and moving towards your nipple.
When and where should I seek medical care?

Call the 1177 helpline if you need advice on what to do. Your call will be answered by a nurse. The nurse can speak both Swedish and English. Help is sometimes available in other languages. Call +46 771 11 77 00 if you are calling from a phone with a foreign number.
Seek medical care

Contact a healthcare centre if any of the following applies:

    it feels like you have an abscess in your breast
    you suspect you have a thrust (yeast) infection in your breast.

Sometimes a video call with a doctor or midwife is enough to provide the help you need.
Get help from an interpreter

You can get help from an interpreter if you do not speak Swedish.


Revision date:
2022-08-29
Editor:
Rebecka Persson, 1177.se, National Editorial Team
Reviewer:
Birgitta Kårén, Midwife, Paediatric Nurse, School Nurse, Stockholm

Infant formula and follow-on formula
Bröstmjölksersättning och tillskottsnäring - engelska

Babies who do not receive breast milk need to be given infant formula. This is made to resemble breast milk. When the baby starts to eat regular food, they can be given what is known as follow-on formula instead.

How to feed a baby with a bottle

Some babies are given both breast milk and infant formula. Others are only given infant formula.

Läs texten på svenska här.
Infant formula

Infant formula contains everything a baby needs during the first six months of life. It resembles breast milk as closely as possible. However, it does not provide the same protection against infection as breast milk.

Infant formula is also called baby formula, infant milk, false milk or just formula.
Follow-on formula

Follow-on formula is designed as nutrition for an infant over six months of age. It can be given to a baby who has started on solid foods. Follow-on formula is not intended to be the baby’s sole source of nutrition.

If you would prefer to continue with infant formula, that is also fine. In such case, your baby may need a little extra iron.
Use only approved formula

Babies should be given formula that is made for their age. You can buy infant formula and follow-on formula in grocery stores or pharmacies.

Use only formula that is approved in Sweden.

Formula is available as a powder that you mix with water. Premixed formula is also available.
Teats and baby bottles

The most common way to give a baby infant formula is in a bottle. There are many different models of teats and baby bottles.

Try out different types to find a model that suits your baby.

Here are some tips about bottles and teats to keep in mind:

    Choose a bottle that holds at least 250 millilitres.
    Make sure there are no cracks in the teat.
    Replace the bottle if it is scratched.

    Choose a teat that is the right size for your baby’s age.

How to mix formula

It is important to maintain good hygiene when mixing formula.

Important things to keep in mind:

    Wash your hands first. Make sure everything around you is clean.

    Check that the bottles and teats are clean.
    Use cold water from the tap. If your water comes from a private well, you should first check the quality of the water.
    Follow the dosage listed on the package. Do not use too much or too little powder.
    The formula should be lukewarm. Test the temperature by putting a couple of drops on your wrist.
    Avoid heating the formula in the microwave.
    Mix new infant formula or follow-on formula for each meal. Do not save mixed formula for more than one hour.

How to feed your baby

How to bottle feed your baby:

    Hold the baby close to your body. Preferably skin-to-skin.
    Rub the teat against your baby’s mouth. When your baby turns toward the teat and opens their mouth, you can insert the teat into it.

    Angle the bottle so that the entire teat fills with formula. Otherwise, your baby could swallow air.
    Hold the bottle still and let your baby set the pace. Take breaks if your baby needs to.
    Allow the baby to suckle until they release the teat.

How to clean the bottle and teat

Wash the bottle and teat in hot water with dishwashing liquid.

You can wash the bottle in a dishwasher, but preferably not the teat.
If you need advice and support

It may take some time before bottle feeding works smoothly, and you may need to be patient. If you have any questions or need help, you can contact a children’s health centre (BVC). In the first week after the baby is born, you can contact the BB ward (maternity ward).

Revision date:
2022-09-08
Editor:
Rebecka Persson, 1177.se, National Editorial Team
Reviewer:
Birgitta Kårén, Midwife, Paediatric Nurse, School Nurse, Stockholm
Filmproducent, produktionsår 2022:
Studio Kupol

Infant formula and follow-on formula
Bröstmjölksersättning och tillskottsnäring - engelska

Babies who do not receive breast milk need to be given infant formula. This is made to resemble breast milk. When the baby starts to eat regular food, they can be given what is known as follow-on formula instead.

How to feed a baby with a bottle

Some babies are given both breast milk and infant formula. Others are only given infant formula.

Läs texten på svenska här.
Infant formula

Infant formula contains everything a baby needs during the first six months of life. It resembles breast milk as closely as possible. However, it does not provide the same protection against infection as breast milk.

Infant formula is also called baby formula, infant milk, false milk or just formula.
Follow-on formula

Follow-on formula is designed as nutrition for an infant over six months of age. It can be given to a baby who has started on solid foods. Follow-on formula is not intended to be the baby’s sole source of nutrition.

If you would prefer to continue with infant formula, that is also fine. In such case, your baby may need a little extra iron.
Use only approved formula

Babies should be given formula that is made for their age. You can buy infant formula and follow-on formula in grocery stores or pharmacies.

Use only formula that is approved in Sweden.

Formula is available as a powder that you mix with water. Premixed formula is also available.
Teats and baby bottles

The most common way to give a baby infant formula is in a bottle. There are many different models of teats and baby bottles.

Try out different types to find a model that suits your baby.

Here are some tips about bottles and teats to keep in mind:

    Choose a bottle that holds at least 250 millilitres.
    Make sure there are no cracks in the teat.
    Replace the bottle if it is scratched.

    Choose a teat that is the right size for your baby’s age.

How to mix formula

It is important to maintain good hygiene when mixing formula.

Important things to keep in mind:

    Wash your hands first. Make sure everything around you is clean.

    Check that the bottles and teats are clean.
    Use cold water from the tap. If your water comes from a private well, you should first check the quality of the water.
    Follow the dosage listed on the package. Do not use too much or too little powder.
    The formula should be lukewarm. Test the temperature by putting a couple of drops on your wrist.
    Avoid heating the formula in the microwave.
    Mix new infant formula or follow-on formula for each meal. Do not save mixed formula for more than one hour.

How to feed your baby

How to bottle feed your baby:

    Hold the baby close to your body. Preferably skin-to-skin.
    Rub the teat against your baby’s mouth. When your baby turns toward the teat and opens their mouth, you can insert the teat into it.

    Angle the bottle so that the entire teat fills with formula. Otherwise, your baby could swallow air.
    Hold the bottle still and let your baby set the pace. Take breaks if your baby needs to.
    Allow the baby to suckle until they release the teat.

How to clean the bottle and teat

Wash the bottle and teat in hot water with dishwashing liquid.

You can wash the bottle in a dishwasher, but preferably not the teat.
If you need advice and support

It may take some time before bottle feeding works smoothly, and you may need to be patient. If you have any questions or need help, you can contact a children’s health centre (BVC). In the first week after the baby is born, you can contact the BB ward (maternity ward).

Revision date:
2022-09-08
Editor:
Rebecka Persson, 1177.se, National Editorial Team
Reviewer:
Birgitta Kårén, Midwife, Paediatric Nurse, School Nurse, Stockholm
Filmproducent, produktionsår 2022:
Studio Kupol

How to reduce the risk of sudden infant death syndrome (SIDS)
Så minskar du risken för plötslig spädbarnsdöd - engelska

Sudden infant death syndrome (SIDS) is when a baby stops breathing and dies, usually during sleep. It is very rare. The best way to reduce the risk is for the baby to sleep on their back.

It is common for babies to take small pauses in their breathing.

Sometimes, it can be a pause of several seconds.

This is perfectly natural and does not lead to sudden infant death syndrome.

Läs texten på svenska här.
What is SIDS?

Sudden infant death syndrome (SIDS) is when a baby stops breathing and dies unexpectedly. It is most common when the baby is asleep.

The baby usually does not show any signs of feeling unwell beforehand.

SIDS usually happens before the baby is six months old.
It is very rare

In Sweden, it is very rare for babies to die from SIDS.

It is not entirely clear what causes SIDS.

But there are some things you can do to reduce the risk. You can read about these below.
Let your baby sleep on their back

The most important piece of advice is that your baby should sleep on their back. This may help because it is easier to get air.

The baby should not sleep on their stomach.

It is not safe for the baby to sleep on their side, as they could roll over onto their stomach.
When the baby is able to roll over onto their side or stomach

The risk of SIDS decreases as the baby gets older.

The risk of SIDS is lower when the baby is able to roll over in their sleep.
Do not smoke

Nicotine and smoking are harmful to the baby. They also increase the risk of SIDS.
This is true both when you are pregnant and after the baby is born.

Nicotine can be found in products such as cigarettes, hookah, e-cigarettes and snus, which you put under your lip.

If you are breastfeeding, the nicotine is passed on to the baby.
Try to stop smoking

It is a good idea for everyone around your baby to try to stop smoking. Reduce smoking as much as possible if you cannot quit completely.

Contact a healthcare centre (vårdcentral) or a children's health centre (barnavårdscentral) if you would like help to stop smoking.
Make sure nothing is near your baby's face

If your baby's face is covered with something, it will be harder for them to breathe. Make sure there are no blankets, pillows, stuffed animals or other objects near your baby's face.

It is also a good idea to make sure your baby is not too warm.

Your baby needs to be able to move around while sleeping.
The safest place for a baby to sleep is in their own bed

Children under the age of three months sleep safest in their own bed in the same room as you.

If you sleep in the same bed, an arm or bedding could end up covering the baby's face.

It is also easier for the baby to end up on their side or stomach.
Move the baby over to their own bed

Your baby can be with you while you breastfeed or bottle-feed. Then place the baby on their back in their own bed.

If your baby falls asleep somewhere else, you can move them over to their own bed.
Do not drink alcohol

Your baby will be affected if you drink alcohol or use sedatives.

Here are some things that could happen:

    You will find it harder to wake up if your baby needs you.
    You might not notice if your baby is not getting air.
    You might accidentally lie on top of your baby.
    Your baby may end up on their stomach or their side.

Revision date:
2022-06-03
Editor:
Jenny Magnusson Österberg, 1177.se, National Editorial Team
Reviewer:
Per Möllborg, Paediatrician, Allergist, Paediatric Health Services, Region Västra Götaland

Vaccination programme for children
Vaccinationsprogrammet för barn - engelska

All children in Sweden are offered vaccination against 12 diseases. This is done to protect the child from becoming seriously ill. These vaccinations are offered free of charge.

Läs texten på svenska här.
What diseases are children vaccinated against?

All children in Sweden are offered vaccination against the following diseases:

    diphtheria
    whooping cough
    tetanus
    polio
    Hib – haemophilus influenzae type b
    pneumococcus
    measles
    mumps
    rubella
    rotavirus
    hepatitis B
    HPV – human papillomavirus.

Children often receive several vaccines in a single shot.
Vaccines protect against serious diseases

Vaccines protect children from getting seriously ill with the listed diseases.

The vaccine also prevents the diseases from spreading.
Vaccines are safe medicines

You are free to choose whether to have your child vaccinated or not.

The healthcare system recommends that everyone do so.

Vaccines are safe medicines.
When is the child vaccinated?

Children are vaccinated on a number of different occasions as they grow up.

The first vaccination is given at six weeks of age.
Children who have moved to Sweden from other countries

The vaccines children receive vary in different countries.

Children born outside of Sweden may need additional vaccines.

If you have any questions about your child's vaccinations, please contact one of the following:

    children's health centre (barnavårdscentralen, BVC)
    school health service (elevhälsan)
    a healthcare centre (vårdcentral).

How can I prepare my child?

It is good if your child is well rested and has eaten before the vaccination.

However, a child who is going to be vaccinated against rotavirus should not eat beforehand.
If your child is worried

Some children may be afraid of needles or that it will hurt.

Tell the child that the vaccination will be quick. It may hurt a little, but it will pass quickly.
If your child is sick

Contact the BVC or the school health service if your child is going to be vaccinated, but is ill. You may need to reschedule the appointment.
How does the vaccination work?

Children up to the age of five are vaccinated at the BVC.

Children who have started school receive the vaccine via the school health service.
The child is given a shot

Children under the age of one are given the shot in their thigh.

Children over the age of one are given the shot in their upper arm.
The rotavirus vaccine is given in the mouth

The vaccine against rotavirus is in the form of drops.

Children are given this vaccine in the mouth.

The liquid has a sweet taste.
How will my child feel afterwards?

There may be some pain at the site where your child received the shot.

It is common for a child to feel a little sick after getting vaccinated. For example, the child may get a fever. This usually passes fairly quickly.

After the rotavirus vaccination, your child may feel sick and have a stomachache.
When and where should I seek medical care?

Most people who have been vaccinated do not need to seek medical care.

If you have any questions or concerns, contact the clinic where your child received the vaccination.

Call the 1177 helpline if you need advice on what to do. Your call will be answered by a nurse. The nurse can speak both Swedish and English. Help is sometimes available in other languages. Call +46 771 11 77 00 if you are calling from a phone with a foreign number.
If urgent care is needed

If your child has a lot of stomach pain, contact a healthcare provider immediately. Contact one of these clinics:

    a healthcare centre (vårdcentral)
    an out-of-hours service.

If they are closed, seek care at an emergency department.

Call 112 if your child becomes completely limp.

Revision date:
2022-06-03
Editor:
Rebecka Persson, 1177.se, National Editorial Team
Reviewer:
Birgitta Kårén, Midwife, Paediatric Nurse, School Nurse, Stockholm

Children's health centre (Barnavårdscentralen, BVC)
Barnavårdscentralen, BVC - engelska

A children's health centre is a clinic for children up to the age of six. At this clinic, staff check the health and development of the child. You can ask questions about everything related to children and parenting.

A children's health centre is often referred to as a BVC.

Visits to the BVC are free of charge.

All parents are welcome.

Läs texten på svenska här.
How do I contact the BVC?

The BVC is usually located in a healthcare centre.

You can search for a BVC here. The information is in Swedish.

The BVC usually contacts a parent directly.
You can visit in person, call or email

The most common way to contact the BVC is to visit or call.

Some BVCs also offer the option of a video call.
What is the BVC?

The BVC handles everything related to the health and development of your child.

The BVC follows a programme that applies to all children throughout the country.

At the BVC, you will meet with a nurse.

On some visits, you will also meet with a doctor.
Visits at different ages

The visits take place from the time the child is born until they are six years old.
Do not visit the BVC when your child is sick

Do not visit the BVC if your child has an infection.

For example, if they have a stomach bug or a cold.

In such cases, you should contact a healthcare centre (vårdcentral) instead.

You can search for a healthcare centre here. The information is in Swedish.
Call 1177 for advice

Call 1177 for help on what to do.

Your call will be answered by a nurse.

If needed, they can tell you where to go for treatment.

The nurses speak Swedish and English.

Help is sometimes available in other languages.

Call 0046 771-11 77 00 if you are calling from a phone with a foreign number.
What happens at the BVC?

Here are some examples of what happens at a BVC:

    The staff go over what care and vaccinations the child has received.
    The child receives their vaccinations.
    The nurse or doctor examines the child.
    The nurse measures and weighs the child.
    You receive support and advice on the health and development of your child.
    You can ask questions about your child and being a parent.

The visits focus on your needs

You will talk about topics such as:

    Your child's health.
    Your child's development.
    How well things are working between parent and child.
    How well the child is eating and sleeping.

The child participates in the visits

The child should be involved in the conversation.

It is important that the child is allowed to express what they think.
The child will be asked to perform different tasks

Sometimes the child is asked to perform different tasks.
This is done to see whether the child is developing as expected.

The tasks that the child is asked to perform are determined by their age.

For example, they may be asked to draw, kick a ball, or thread beads on a string.
When the child receives their vaccinations

The child will receive their vaccinations according to the Swedish vaccination programme.

Ask the staff if you have any questions about vaccination.
You can get help from an interpreter

You can get help from an interpreter if you do not speak Swedish. Let the clinic know you need an interpreter when you book your appointment.

Revision date:
2022-04-29
Editor:
Jenny Magnusson Österberg, 1177.se, National Editorial Team
Reviewer:
Linda Håkansson, District Nurse, Blekinge

Information if from: https://www.1177.se/en/other-languages/other-languages/att-ta-hand-om-barn/
Retrived from: https://www.1177.se/en/other-languages/other-languages/att-ta-hand-om-barn/

Interpretation into my language

You can get help from an interpreter if you do not speak Swedish. The interpreter will help you by translating what is said when you visit healthcare or dental services. Let the clinic know you need an interpreter who speaks your language when you book your appointment.
Ett vårdbesök med tolk.
An interpreter works by translating between different languages.

You will not have to pay for assistance by an interpreter.

What does an interpreter do?

An interpreter translates what the healthcare professional says, so that you can understand. The interpreter speaks both Swedish and your language.

The interpreter can translate any questions you may have. The interpreter will then translate the healthcare professional’s answers into your language.

An interpreter does not usually translate written text.
This is how an appointment with an interpreter might work

Here are some examples of how an interpreter may assist you during a meeting:

    The interpreter is physically present at the meeting with the healthcare professional.
    The interpreter participates in the meeting through a speakerphone.
    You, the healthcare professional and the interpreter are in contact via a camera and computer. This is called video interpreting.

Ask the healthcare professional how interpretation will be set up when you book your appointment.
The interpreter is sworn to secrecy

An interpreter is sworn to secrecy. This means that the interpreter is not allowed to share any information about you without your permission.

Sometimes family or friends may want to help to interpret. This can sometimes lead to misunderstandings. In addition, they are not sworn to secrecy. It is therefore better to get help from a person who works as an interpreter.

Revision date:
2022-04-12
Editor:
Katja Öster, 1177.se, National Editorial Team
Reviewer:
Anna Åberg, National Adviser, Legal Division, Sveriges kommuner och Regioner, Stockholm
Photographer:
Anette Andersson, AA fotograf

Information about Interpretation into my language is from: https://www.1177.se/en/other-languages/other-languages/regler-och-rattigheter---andra-sprak/tolkning-till-mitt-sprak--andra-sprak/

Mammogram – breast screening
Mammografi - engelska

A mammogram is a breast screening tool that can show whether you have breast cancer or are at risk of getting cancer. Mammograms make it possible to detect and treat breast cancer at an early stage. Mammograms are performed free of charge.

Läs texten på lätt svenska här.
What is a mammogram?

A mammogram is an X-ray of the breast that can show whether there have been any changes. The change may be so small that you cannot feel it yourself. A change is not necessarily something dangerous that you need to worry about, but in some cases it could lead to breast cancer.

Breast cancer is the most common type of cancer in women. The risk of getting breast cancer increases with age. There is a greater chance of recovery if the cancer is detected early.
Why am I being called in for a mammogram?

All women in Sweden between the ages of 40 and 74 are called in for a mammogram about every other year. You will receive a personal invitation for an examination. The invitation will list the time and place of the examination.

You can reschedule the appointment if it does not fit your schedule. You can also contact a mammography clinic or healthcare centre to schedule an appointment.

You can do the mammogram even if you are pregnant or breastfeeding. Breastfeed or pump out the milk right before the examination to make it easier.

It is your own decision whether you want to have a mammogram, but it is a good idea to do it.
You can bring a friend along or use an interpreter

The examination is done by a nurse at a mammography clinic.

All staff at the clinic have a duty to maintain patient confidentiality. This means that the staff are not allowed to tell people outside of the healthcare system anything about you.

It is important that you understand what the staff tell you. If you do not speak Swedish, you may be entitled to an interpreter (a person who translates from your language into Swedish, and vice versa). The interpreter also has a duty to maintain patient confidentiality. If you would like an interpreter, please contact the clinic before your appointment.

You can bring a friend or family member along to the examination if you want. A friend or family member who translates for you is not an interpreter, and therefore does not have a duty to maintain patient confidentiality.
How the examination is performed
Picture of mammography
The nurse explains how the examination is performed.

You will enter a room with a machine that takes pictures of the inside of the body, called X-rays.

You will be asked a number of questions, such as:

    Have you noticed any changes in your breasts?
    Are you taking birth control pills or any other medicines that contain hormones?

You will be asked to remove your clothes from the waist up, and then sit or stand near the machine. The nurse will show you how to hold your arms and how to stand. Try to relax.

The nurse will help you place one of your breasts on a special plate. Another plate will then be pressed against your breast, making it flat. It takes a few seconds to take an X-ray. Two or three different X-rays are needed for each breast. The entire examination will take 15 to 30 minutes.
When will I get the results?

You will get the results in about two weeks. You will get a letter or be contacted by phone. The letter will be sent to your official address of record. You will be asked to come in for a new examination if the mammogram showed that something has changed in your breasts.
You can request an examination

You can contact a mammography clinic or healthcare centre and request a mammogram. Contact a healthcare centre if you have noticed any changes in your breasts, like if you feel something hard. If that is the case, you will need to be examined by a doctor.

Feel free to call the 1177 hotline if you have any questions or need some advice by phone. The hotline is staffed by nurses. They can let you know whether you should seek medical care.

You can speak Swedish or English. The 1177 hotline is free of charge.

Revision date:
2020-11-10
Editor:
Lovisa Dragstedt, 1177.se, National Editorial Team
Reviewer:
Bertil Marklund, professor in general medicine, Göteborg
Photographer:
Emma Hasselgren, 1177 Vårdguiden, nationella redaktionen

PSA test for the prostate
Blodprov: PSA - engelska

The PSA test is a blood test that can show whether there are any changes in your prostate. Some changes are harmless, while others could lead to prostate cancer. A doctor can use a PSA test to find out whether you need additional examinations or treatments.

Läs texten på svenska här.
Why should I do a PSA test?

The prostate is located inside the body, above the penis. You can do a blood test called a PSA test if the doctor thinks there might be a change in your prostate.

If something in your prostate has changed, you may notice that you need to pee more often or that you pee with a weak stream. Seek medical care if this happens to you.
""
The prostate is located inside the body, above the penis.
What can the PSA test show?

The prostate produces a protein called PSA, prostate-specific antigen. The test shows how much PSA is found in your blood. A lot of PSA in your blood could indicate that something in your prostate has changed.

You may have to undergo several examinations in order to receive the right treatment.
What can cause it?

It is common for something in the prostate to change in men over 50. It is usually not a reason to worry. But, a change could also be caused by inflammation, which is a kind of swelling, or even cancer.

Prostate cancer is the most common type of cancer in men. The risk of prostate cancer increases with age.

Some types of prostate cancer develop very slowly, without you even noticing. Other types of prostate cancer develop quickly. In such cases, you need to start treatment as soon as possible. There is a greater chance of recovery if the cancer is detected early.
You can bring a friend along or get the help of an interpreter

It is important that you understand what the staff tell you. If you do not speak Swedish, you may be entitled to an interpreter, which is a person who translates from your language into Swedish, and vice versa. The interpreter also has a duty to maintain patient confidentiality. If you would like an interpreter, please contact the clinic before your appointment.

You can bring a friend or family member along if you want. A friend or family member who translates for you is not an interpreter, and therefore does not have a duty to maintain patient confidentiality.
How the sample is taken
En person som lämnar blodprov genom en nål i armen.
A nursing assistant takes the blood sample from your arm using a thin needle.

The sample for the PSA test is taken at a healthcare centre or a hospital. A nursing assistant will take the blood sample from your arm using a thin needle. Some people find this painful or uncomfortable, but it will be over quickly.
When will I get the test results?

You will get the results in a few weeks. You will get a letter or be contacted by phone. The letter will be sent to your official address of record. You will be asked to come in for a new examination if the test showed that something has changed.
Would you like to do a PSA test?

You can contact a healthcare centre if you would like to have a PSA test.

Feel free to call the 1177 hotline if you have any questions or need some advice by phone. The hotline is staffed by nurses. They can let you know whether you should seek medical care.

You can speak Swedish or English. The 1177 hotline is free of charge.

Revision date:
2020-01-24
Editor:
Lovisa Dragstedt, 1177.se, National Editorial Team
Reviewer:
Bertil Marklund, professor in general medicine, Göteborg
Illustrator:
Kari Toverud

This information about medical tests is from: https://www.1177.se/en/other-languages/other-languages/undersokningarprover---andra-sprak/

How dental care works in Sweden
Så fungerar tandvården i Sverige - engelska

Dental care is often more expensive than other care. Compare dental care costs before choosing a dentist or dental hygienist. The amount you need to pay depends on factors such as your age and what treatments you need.

In Sweden, you pay a large part of the dental care costs yourself. So, always ask your dentist or dental hygienist how much an examination or treatment will cost. You have the right to know this before the services are provided.

If you come from another country or are an asylum seeker, you can read more here.

Läs texten på svenska här.

How do I seek dental care?

If you need help with your teeth, seek treatment at a dental clinic, which is staffed by dentists, dental hygienists and dental nurses. They can examine, treat and prevent problems with your teeth and gums. You can choose which clinic you want to visit.

You can find dental care here.
Free for children and young people

Children and young people can receive dental care free of charge. This applies until 31 December of the year of their 23rd birthday. Almost all examinations and treatments are covered.
Financial support for dental care

You will need to pay for dental care from the year of your 24th birthday.

You receive an allowance for dental care each year. The amount you receive depends on your age. This is called the general dental care allowance. When it is time to pay, let your dental clinic know that you want the allowance applied.
Special allowance if you have a disease

If you have a disease that affects your teeth, you can receive a special allowance for dental care. A dentist or dental hygienist will decide whether you are eligible for the special dental care allowance. You may need a doctor’s certificate stating what disease you have.
Limit for how much you have to pay

There is a limit for how much you have to pay for dental care over a twelve-month period. This is called high-cost protection for dental care.
Sometimes dental care is paid like medical care

There are some cases where you pay the same price for dental care as you would for medical care. One example of this is if you have a disease and need dental care as part of the treatment.

Such dental care is free of charge for people aged 85 and older.
Fixed price in some clinics

Some dental clinics offer an agreement that acts like insurance. This means that you pay the same amount every month. You pay this amount even when you do not visit the dentist that particular month. When you later need treatment, like getting a filling in a tooth, it is already paid for.

You can ask for help if you cannot afford dental treatment. Ask the dental clinic if they would split the bill into several invoices. You could also talk to your bank or contact Social Services in your municipality.
Interpretation into your language

You can get help from an interpreter if you do not speak Swedish. Let the clinic know you need an interpreter when you book your appointment. There may sometimes be a charge for interpreter services.

Revision date:
2022-10-04
Editor:
Katja Öster, 1177.se, National Editorial Team
Reviewer:
Gunnar Henning, Dentist, Oral Health Unit, Folktandvården Västra Götaland, Göteborg

Dental care in Sweden if you come from another country
Tandvård om du kommer från ett annat land - engelska

You may be entitled to dental care on the same terms as those who have Swedish dental insurance. How much you will have to pay depends, among other things, on which country you are from.

If you are an asylum seeker or do not have a permit to be in Sweden, you can read more here.

Läs texten på svenska här.
Emergency or planned dental care

Dental care can be emergency or planned. Emergency dental care is treatment that cannot wait until you return home. All other dental care is planned.

It is the dentist who decides whether the treatment you need is considered emergency dental care. One example is if you damage a tooth. It then depends on how much pain you are in and how long you plan to be in Sweden.
If you are from an EU country, EEA country, Switzerland or the UK

The EEA includes Norway, Iceland and Liechtenstein.
Emergency dental care

Present your EU card to receive emergency dental care.  You will then pay the same price as people insured in Sweden. You order an EU card in your home country. Children must also have an EU card.

If you do not have an EU card, there are two options:

    You can request a provisional certificate from your country’s equivalent of the Swedish Social Insurance Agency (Försäkringskassan). This is a temporary certificate that works in the same way as an EU card.
    You can pay the full cost and then apply to be reimbursed the money when you get home. Keep all the receipts from the dentist.

If you are insured in the UK, you will get a Health Insurance Card. This card gives you the same rights as an EU card.
Planned dental care in Sweden

You will need a certificate from your home country if you want planned dental care in Sweden. The certificate must state which dentist in Sweden will treat you and what treatment you will receive. You request the certificate from your country’s equivalent of the Swedish Social Insurance Agency.
Dental care if you come from a Nordic country

If you are from a Nordic country, you pay the same price for emergency dental care as people living in Sweden. This applies both if you are in Sweden on holiday or if you live here. You will need to show your passport or ID card and provide your home address.

The Nordic countries are:

    Denmark
    Finland
    Norway
    Faroe Islands
    Greenland
    Iceland
    Åland

Free emergency dental care for children and young people

If you are a child or young person from an EU country, EEA country, Switzerland or the UK, you can receive emergency dental care in Sweden free of charge. This applies until 31 December of the year of your 23rd birthday. You will need to present your EU card.
Dental care for students

If you are from an EU country, EEA country, Switzerland or the UK and are studying in Sweden, you need to present your EU card to receive emergency dental care. You will then pay the same price as people insured in Sweden.
Swedes from abroad visiting Sweden

If you are a Swedish citizen living outside an EU country, EEA country, Switzerland or the UK, you will have to pay the full cost of dental care in Sweden. This applies to both emergency and planned dental care.
Interpretation into your language

You can get help from an interpreter if you do not speak Swedish. Let the clinic know you need an interpreter when you book your appointment. There may sometimes be a charge for interpreter services.

Revision date:
2022-10-04
Editor:
Katja Öster, 1177.se, National Editorial Team
Reviewer:
Victoria Kornedal, Operations Developer in International Care, Försäkringskassan, Stockholm

Dental care if you are an asylum seeker or do not have a permit to be in Sweden
Tandvård om du är asylsökande eller inte har tillstånd att vara i Sverige - engelska

If you are an adult asylum seeker in Sweden, you have a right to receive dental care that is deemed as urgent. This also applies if you are in Sweden without a permit. If you are under the age of 18, you always have the right to dental care.

Dental care is regarded as urgent if you need treatment to keep the problem from developing into an emergency. The dentist will decide whether the dental treatment you need is urgent.

If you come from another country and are seeking dental care in Sweden, you can read more here.

Läs texten på svenska här.
How do I seek dental care?

Seek treatment at a dental clinic if you or a member of your family has a toothache.
LMA card if you are an asylum seeker

When you seek asylum, you will receive a special card from the Swedish Migration Agency (Migrationsverket). This is called an LMA card. You must present the card when you seek dental care.

Children also receive an LMA card when they seek asylum.
What should I do if I come from Ukraine?

Register with the Swedish Migration Agency if you are a refugee from Ukraine. You will then get the same dental care as people seeking asylum.
Present your UT card when you seek dental care

You will receive a special card when you register with the Swedish Migration Agency. This is called a UT card. You must present the card when you seek dental care. This applies to both adults and children.
If you are not registered with the Swedish Migration Agency

If you are not registered with the Swedish Migration Agency, you can receive emergency dental care, but will have to pay for it yourself.
How much does dental care cost?

For children under the age of 18, dental care is free of charge. Almost all examinations and treatments are covered.
Adults pay for dental care

If you are aged 18 or older, you pay a small fee for dental care that is deemed urgent.
Allowance from the Swedish Migration Agency

You can apply for an allowance from the Swedish Migration Agency for medical, dental and prescription medicine expenses. The allowance covers costs that exceed a set amount within a six-month period.
Interpretation into your language

You can get help from an interpreter if you do not speak Swedish. Let the clinic know you need an interpreter when you book your appointment.

Revision date:
2022-10-06
Editor:
Katja Öster, 1177.se, National Editorial Team
Reviewer:
Anna Åberg, National Adviser, Legal Division, Sveriges kommuner och Regioner, Stockholm

Information about dental care is from: https://www.1177.se/en/other-languages/other-languages/tandvard-engelska/